**Recovery Dharma **

> ![](media/image1.jpg){width="1.2652777777777777in"
> height="1.2652777777777777in"}

**Recovery **

**Dharma **

*How to Use Buddhist *
======================

*Practices and Principles to Heal the Suffering* *of Addiction*

version 1.0, August 2019

> *Recovery Dharma *www.recoverydharma.org* *
>
> *copyright © 2019 Recovery Dharma*
> ![](media/image2.jpg){width="0.8333333333333334in" height="0.15625in"}
>
> *This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
> 4.0 International License. *
>
> *ISBN: 978-1-08604-000-5 *

literature@recoverydharma.org

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
==================

Preface
.......................................................................
vii

Introduction: What is Recovery Dharma? ................ viii

The Practice
............................................................... xv

Awakening: Buddha .................................................... 1

The Truth: Dharma ......................................................
7

> The First Noble Truth .............................................. 8
>
> The Second Noble Truth ....................................... 14
>
> The Third Noble Truth .......................................... 17
>
> The Fourth Noble Truth ........................................ 19
>
> Wise Understanding ....................................... 21
>
> Wise Intention ................................................ 24
>
> Wise Speech ................................................... 33
>
> Wise Action ................................................... 36
>
> Wise Livelihood ............................................. 40
>
> Wise Effort ..................................................... 41
>
> Wise Mindfulness .......................................... 43
>
> Wise Concentration ........................................ 48

Community: Sangha .................................................. 52
Isolation and Connection ..................................... 55

Working with Others ........................................... 59

Wise Friends and Mentors ................................... 62

Service and Generosity ........................................ 64

Recovery is Possible ..................................................
68

Appendix:

> Selected Meditations ............................................. 73
>
> Questions for Inquiry ............................................ 92

Glossary of Terms ............................................... 103
Meeting Format ................................................... 105

PREFACE 
========

Once we make a decision to recover from addiction—to substances, habits,
people, whatever—it can be scary. The feeling is often one of loss and
loneliness, because recovery can shake our sense of identity, our idea
of who we are. *Who will I be if I let my addiction go?* Change can be
hard to face, even if we know we’re letting go of something that’s a
danger to us. For many of us, the first and most significant challenge
was finding a safe and stable place to begin healing.

This is a book about using Buddhist practices and principles to recover
from addiction, but you don’t need to become a Buddhist to benefit from
this program. One of the most revolutionary things the Buddha taught was
that the mind is not only the source of great suffering— due to craving,
greed, anger, and confusion—but the cure for that suffering as well. So
what we’re doing is using an ancient, proven way to literally change our
minds. And we’re choosing to trust in our own potential for wisdom and
compassion for others *and* ourselves.

What you have in your hands is a collaboration from many members of our
community. It’s intended to be a friendly guide for those new to this
path as well as longterm practitioners. It’s structured around what are
sometimes called the “three jewels of Buddhism:” **the Buddha** (the
potential for our own awakening and the goal of the path), **the
Dharma** (how we get there), and **the Sangha** (who we travel with).
We’ll share how we have used this program to recover from addiction and
the ways we’ve made it our own: not as a one-size-fits-all approach, but
as a dynamic set of tools and techniques that anyone can use to find
relief from the suffering of addiction.

> **WHAT IS RECOVERY DHARMA? **

The word *dharma* doesn’t have a single English meaning. It’s a word in
an ancient language called Sanskrit, and it can be translated as
“truth,” “phenomena,” or “the nature of things.” When it’s capitalized,
the word *Dharma* usually means the teachings of the Buddha and the
practices based on those teachings.

The Buddha knew that all human beings, to one degree or another,
struggle with craving—the powerful, sometimes blinding desire to change
our thoughts, feelings, and circumstances. Those of us who experience
addiction have been more driven to use substances or behaviors to do
this, but the underlying craving is the same. And even though the Buddha
didn’t talk specifically about addiction, he understood the obsessive
nature of the human mind. He understood our attachment to pleasure and
aversion to pain. He understood the extreme lengths we can sometimes go
to, chasing what we want to feel and running away from the feelings we
fear. And he found a solution.

This book describes a way to free ourselves from the suffering of
addiction using Buddhist practices and principles. This program leads to
recovery from addiction to substances like alcohol and drugs, and also
from what we refer to as *process addictions*. We can also become
addicted to sex, gambling, technology, work, codependence, shopping,
food, media, self-harm, lying, stealing, obsessive worrying. This is a
path to freedom from any repetitive and habitual behavior that causes
suffering.

Many of us who have found our way here might be new to Buddhism. There
are unfamiliar words, concepts, and ways of looking at the world. It can
be intimidating and uncomfortable to sit in a meeting with people
throwing around words like karma, Dharma, Sangha, and Buddha. If you
have felt this way, you’re not alone. The purpose of this book is to lay
out our path and practice in a clear and simple way that can be of use
to people who are brand new to recovery and to Buddhism, as well as
those with some experience. It describes the original Buddhist teachings
to show where our program comes from. It introduces the essence of
Buddhism’s basic teachings— the Four Noble Truths—in a way that shows
how practicing the Eightfold Path is a pragmatic tool-kit for dealing
with the challenges of both early and long-term recovery.

This is a renunciation-based program. Regardless of the type of
addiction we identify with, all of our members commit to a basic
abstinence from the substance or behavior of our addiction. For those of
us whose addictions involve things like food and technology from which
complete abstinence may not be possible, renunciation will mean
something different, based on thoughtful boundaries and intentions in
our behaviors. For some of us, abstinence from things like obsessive
sexual behavior or compulsively seeking out love and relationships may
be necessary as we work to understand and find meaningful boundaries.
Many of us have found that after renouncing our primary addiction for a
period of time, other harmful behaviors and process addictions become
apparent in our lives. But rather than getting discouraged, we found
that we can also meet these behaviors with compassion and patient
investigation. We believe recovery is a lifelong, holistic process of
peeling back layers of habits and conditioned behaviors to find our own,
sometimes hidden, potential for awakening.

Our program is peer-led: we don’t follow any one teacher or leader. We
support each other as partners walking the path of recovery together.
This is not a program based in dogma or religion, but in finding the
truth for ourselves. This is wisdom that has worked for us, but it is
not the only path. It’s fully compatible with other spiritual paths and
programs of recovery. We know from our own experience that true recovery
is only possible with the intention of radical honesty, understanding,
awareness, and integrity, and we trust you to discover your own path. We
believe this program can help you do just that.

Ours is a program that asks us to never stop growing. It asks us to own
our choices and be responsible for our own healing. It’s based on
kindness, generosity, forgiveness, and deep compassion. We do not rely
on tools of shame and fear as motivation. We know these haven’t worked
in our own individual pasts, and have often created more struggle and
suffering through relapse and discouragement. The courage it takes to
recover from addiction is ultimately courage of the heart, and we aim to
support each other as we commit to this brave work.

Many of us have spent our lives beating ourselves up. In this program,
we renounce violence and doing harm, including the harm and violence we
do to ourselves. We believe in the healing power of forgiveness. We put
our trust in our own potential to awaken and recover, in the Four Noble
Truths of the Buddha, and in the people we meet and connect with in
meetings and throughout our journey in recovery.

The truth is that we can never truly escape the circumstances and
conditions that are part of the human condition. We’ve tried that
already—through drugs and alcohol, through sex and codependency, through
gambling and technology, through work and shopping, through food or the
restriction of food, through obsession and the futile attempts to
control our experiences and feelings—and we’re here because we realized
it didn’t work. This is a program that asks us to recognize and accept
that some pain and disappointment will always be present, to investigate
the unskillful ways we have dealt with that pain in the past, and to
develop a habit of understanding, compassion, and mercy toward our own
pain, the pain of others, and the pain we have caused others due to our
ignorance and confusion. That acceptance is what brings freedom from the
suffering that made our pain unbearable.

This book is only an introduction to a path that can bring liberation
and freedom from the cycle of suffering created by addiction. The
intention, and the hope, is that every person on the path will be
empowered to make it their own.

May you be happy.

May you be at ease.

May you be free from suffering.

Where to Begin 
---------------

So how *can* we use Buddhism for our recovery? There are three ways in
which we focus our energy: not stepby-step, but in a holistic way as our
insight and our awareness grow.

We come to understand the Four Noble Truths and use them as a guide for
our own path of recovery. This program doesn’t ask us to believe in
anything other than our own potential to wake up: just allowing
ourselves to believe that it’s possible, or even that it *might* be
possible. We begin to believe that our own efforts will make a
difference. This is the realization that there is a way to recover and
then the decision to start that process.

As we learn about the Four Noble Truths—including the Eightfold Path
that leads to the end of the suffering caused by addiction—we put these
principles into practice in our lives. This book includes an
introduction to these truths, and there are many ways to continue
studying them. The Eightfold Path is a guide to a nonharming way of
being in the world. It’s not just a philosophy, but a plan of action.

Meditation is an essential part of the program. This book has some basic
instructions so you can start right away. Most of us have found it very
helpful to attend meetings that include an opportunity to practice
meditation with others. A key to this program is establishing a regular
meditation practice, in and outside of meetings. This will help us begin
the process of investigating our own minds, our reactivity, and our
behavior. We look deeply at the nature and causes of our suffering so we
can find a path to freedom that’s based on authentic selfknowledge.

The following chapters talk about these three aspects of the program—the
“three jewels” of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha—as a way of developing the
wisdom, ethical conduct, and spiritual practice that we have found leads
to recovery. We hope that people and groups will use this book in ways
that are useful for their own processes of recovery. We offer some
suggestions in that spirit. You’re invited to take what works for you
and leave the rest.

At the end of each section are a series of questions to explore. These
Inquiries can be used as part of a formal process of self-investigation
with a mentor, wise friend, or group; as tools to explore a specific
life situation; as guides for a daily self-inquiry practice; or as
meeting discussion topics. A wise friend or mentor can be of great help
in deepening your understanding, and we encourage you to reach out to
people you encounter at meetings. Supportive friendships are an integral
part of the practice. The questions may bring up shame, guilt, or
sadness; or, for some, they may potentially activate trauma. It can be
very beneficial to get supports set up ahead of time, such as taking the
questions only one at a time, timing the work so you can have a chance
to engage in self-care afterwards, and so forth. The intent of the
questions is to deepen our practice so we can experience relief sooner,
not to bring us more suffering.

Our path is not a checklist, but is rather a practice in which we choose
where and how to invest our energy in a way that is both wise and
compassionate toward ourselves and others. We do not “complete” our
journey based on how much we meditate or how many meetings we go to or
how many written inventories we’ve completed. The practice of the
Eightfold Path helps us develop insight and self-compassion as we begin
to look into the causes and conditions that led to our own suffering
with addiction. The tools will come to bear the signs of wear and
markings of our using them.

This path doesn’t have an end. Your life, like all of ours, will
probably continue to present you with challenges. What the path *does*
offer, however, is a way out of the suffering that our habitual
reactions to challenges often bring, and an end to the illusion of
escape we tried to find in substances or behaviors. It’s a way to break
our own chains with our own hands. It’s a path of freedom.

THE PRACTICE 
=============

**Renunciation:** We understand *addiction* to describe the overwhelming
craving and compulsive use of substances or behaviors in order to escape
present-time reality, either by clinging to pleasure or running from
pain. We commit to the intention of abstinence from alcohol and other
addictive substances. For those of us recovering from process
addictions, particularly those for which complete abstinence is not
possible, we also identify and commit to wise boundaries around our
harmful behaviors, preferably with the help of a mentor or therapeutic
professional.

**Meditation:** We commit to the intention of developing a daily
meditation practice. We use meditation as a tool to investigate our
actions, intentions, and reactivity. Meditation is a personal practice,
and we commit to finding a balanced effort toward this and other healthy
practices that are appropriate to our own journey on the path.

**Meetings:** We attend recovery meetings whenever possible, in person
and/or online. Some may wish to be part of other recovery fellowships
and Buddhist communities. In early recovery, it is recommended to attend
a recovery meeting as often as possible. For many that may mean every
day. We also commit to becoming an active part of the community,
offering our own experiences and service wherever possible.

**The Path:** We commit to deepening our understanding of the Four Noble
Truths and to practicing the Eightfold Path in our daily lives.

**Inquiry and Investigation:** We explore the Four Noble Truths as they
relate to our addictive behavior through writing and sharing in-depth,
detailed Inquiries. These can be worked with the guidance of a mentor,
in partnership with a trusted friend, or with a group. As we complete
our written Inquiries, we undertake to hold ourselves accountable and
take direct responsibility for our actions, which includes making amends
for the harm we have caused in our past. .

**Sangha, Wise Friends, Mentors:** We cultivate relationships within a
recovery community, to both support our own recovery and support the
recovery of others. After we have completed significant work on our
Inquiries, established a meditation practice, and achieved renunciation
from our addictive behaviors, we can then become mentors to help others
on their path to liberation from addiction. Anyone with any period of
time of renunciation and practice can be of service to others in their
sangha. When mentors are not available, a group of wise friends can act
as partners in self-inquiry and support each other’s practice.

**Growth:** We continue our study of these Buddhist practices through
reading, listening to dharma talks, visiting and becoming members of
recovery and spiritual sanghas, and attending meditation or dharma
retreats when we believe these practices will contribute to our
understanding and wisdom. We undertake a lifelong journey of growth and
awakening.

Awakening: *Buddha* 
====================

Most of us enter into recovery with one goal in mind: to stop the
suffering that got us here in the first place, whether that was
drinking, using drugs, stealing, eating, gambling, sex, codependency,
technology, or other process addictions. As newcomers, most of us would
be satisfied with simple damage control. We want to stop harming
ourselves or others in particular ways.

You’re reading this right now because you had enough wisdom to start
seeking the end of the suffering of your addiction. You’ve already taken
the first step on the path to your own awakening. Everyone who has made
the wise intention to recover, wherever they are on their path, has
accessed that pure, wise part of themselves that the wreckage of
addiction can never touch.

So many of us have hearts that are tender and worn raw from the
suffering we’ve experienced. Many of us have collected layers of trauma
which often led us to seek temporary relief in our addictive behavior.
But then, through our addiction, we added more layers of demoralization
and shame that hardened around our hearts. On top of those layers are
the ones we built for our protection: all the ways we’ve run from pain,
all the ways we’ve pushed people away in fear of being vulnerable, all
the ways we’ve shut parts of ourselves off in order to adapt to what
often feels like a hostile world.

We started to recover when we let ourselves believe in the part of us
that’s still there beneath all those layers we’ve collected and
built—the pure, radiant, courageous heart where we find our potential
for awakening. Who were we before the world got to us? Who are we beyond
the obsession of our conditioned minds? Who are we beneath all our walls
and heartbreak? Despite the trauma, addiction, fear, and shame, there is
a still and centered part of us that remains whole. There is a part of
us that’s not traumatized, that’s not addicted, that’s not ruled by fear
or shame. This is where wisdom comes from, and it’s the foundation of
our recovery.

If you’re at the beginning of your recovery journey, it may seem
impossible to access this part of you. But the reason you’re here is
because you already did. It’s because you felt some small glimmer of
hope—maybe born out of desperation—that there might be a way out, that
things could change if you took wise action and reached out for help.
Maybe it feels impossible to have faith in this part of you, to believe
that you have the potential to be someone capable of wisdom and kindness
and ethical deeds, to believe you can be the source of your own healing
and awakening. But don’t worry. Recovery doesn’t happen all at once. The
path is a lifetime of individual steps. It’s not only the Buddha’s
example that shows us the way, it’s also the examples of people in our
recovery communities who have gone through what we have and made it
through to the other side. They show us we can, too.

So what does the Buddha have to do with recovery?

There are two ways in which we use the word **Buddha,** which means
“awakened.” First, it is the title given to a person named Siddhartha
Gautama, a man who lived in modern-day Nepal and India roughly 2,500
years ago. After many years of meditation and ethical practice, he
discovered a path that leads to liberation or awakening and the end of
suffering, and that’s why Siddhartha came to be known as the Buddha.

The second usage of the word Buddha follows from the first. Buddha can
refer not only to the historical figure but also to the idea of
awakening: the fact that each of us has within ourselves the potential
to awaken to the same understanding as the original Buddha. When we take
refuge in the Buddha, we take refuge not in Siddhartha as a man, but in
the fact that he was able to find freedom from his suffering. He was
human just like us, and experienced suffering just like us. He found
liberation from it, and so can we.

The Story of the Original Buddha 
---------------------------------

To understand the nature of this awakening and what it is we’re aiming
at, it helps to know something about the life of the man named
Siddhartha Gautama.

There are many versions of the traditional story of the Buddha. Some of
them are very mythical, while some of them are more down to earth. It’s
been said that Siddhartha was a prince, that he was wealthy, and that he
was born into privilege, sheltered from much of the suffering of the
world. The story goes that young Siddhartha sneaked away from his palace
and saw people suffering from old age, sickness, and death. He realized
that no amount of privilege could protect him from this suffering.
Wealth wouldn’t prevent it. Comfort wouldn’t prevent it. Pleasure
wouldn’t prevent it. Despite having a life of ease, Siddhartha still
found that he experienced suffering and dissatisfaction. He was born
with everything, but it wasn’t enough.

This persistent dissatisfaction with life, whether dramatic or subtle,
was referred to as **dukkha** in the language of the Buddha’s time, a
word we still use today. All humans experience dukkha, but some of us—
particularly those of us who have struggled with addiction—seem to
experience it on a more intense level, and with worse consequences. What
is addiction but the consistent and nagging feeling of “not enough?”
What is addiction other than being constantly unsatisfied?

Siddhartha saw clearly that pain was an unavoidable part of life, and he
became determined to find a way to put an end to it. He left his family
and tried, for a while, the life of an ascetic—the most extreme opposite
to his previous life of comfort and wealth. As an ascetic, he sat in
extremely uncomfortable postures meditating for long periods of time. He
slept very little. He ate very little. He even tried breathing very
little. He thought that, since material comfort hadn’t brought about an
end to suffering, maybe the opposite of material comfort would. But it
didn’t. Pushed to the brink of death, Siddhartha abandoned the idea of
extreme asceticism and instead chose what he came to call “the middle
path.”

Siddhartha realized that both the extremes of pleasure and denial of
pleasure had gotten him nowhere nearer to liberation. Neither extreme
had given relief from his suffering. So he set off on his own to
meditate. Sitting beneath a Bodhi tree, he meditated deeply and
discovered the path that leads to the end of suffering. He looked within
himself for his own liberation, and he found it.

What Siddhartha found meditating under the Bodhi tree is what we refer
to as the **Dharma**, or the “Truth.” It’s what the path of Buddhism is
based on. Central to this path are the Four Noble Truths and the
Eightfold Path, which will be explained in the next chapter.

Siddhartha was called the Buddha, or “The One Who Woke Up,” because the
way most people go through life was thought to be like dreaming or being
in a trance. The Buddha spent the rest of his life developing the Dharma
into a simple but sophisticated system. He shared it with anyone who
would listen, dedicating himself to a life of service to free everybody
from suffering. He bucked the trends of his time by letting women and
the poorest class of citizens become monastics. Everybody was welcome in
his *Sangha*, his spiritual community. Central to his teachings was that
liberation is available to all—to the most broken and oppressed among
us, to the sick, to the powerless, to those who have lost everything, to
those who have nothing left to lose. All of us, even the most addicted,
the most lost, can find our way to awakening.

Walking in the Footsteps of the Buddha 
---------------------------------------

The story of the Buddha may seem far removed from our everyday reality,
but his life, both before and after his awakening, offers us a model for
our own lives. Probably all of us can relate to the suffering that seems
to be unavoidable in life. In some way or another, the signs of aging,
sickness, or death have touched us all. We’ve experienced the truth of
impermanence—the highs and pleasures we achieved in our addictions
always eventually wore off, but we kept chasing them anyway. We’ve
endured other forms of suffering, some of it selfinflicted and some at
the hands of others. And we’ve dealt with the subtle forms of dukkha:
the annoyances with others, the boredom, the loss of what we want, the
inability to keep what we have, the impatience with life, the refusal to
accept what is. And what have we done with these experiences of
suffering? Maybe we tried to change them. Maybe we tried to avoid them.
Maybe we tried to find something more pleasurable to replace what was
unpleasant.

It’s at this point that most of our stories start to look different than
Siddhartha’s, and it’s this difference that led us to this program.
Instead of deeply understanding suffering, we found ways to avoid it or
replace it with something we found more pleasurable. For some of us,
that came in the form of drinking or using. For others, it came in the
form of sex, relationships, food, selfharming, technology addiction,
workaholism, or gambling. And for a lot of us, our stories contain some
version of “all of the above.” Whatever our behavior was, we found that
it was just a temporary solution that always led to deeper suffering for
ourselves and others.

We’ve come to realize that our stories don’t have to continue like this.
The life of Siddhartha, and the lives of the countless people we meet in
recovery who have found an end to the suffering of addiction, prove to
us that there is another way.

We, too, can look back upon our own lives and see clearly the path that
brought us here. We can examine our own actions and intentions and come
to understand how we shape our own future. And we can gain insight into
the nature of our own suffering and follow a path that leads to less
harm and less suffering.

This is a path of practice. While the Buddha can be an ideal that
inspires us, he won’t do the work for us. The Buddha wasn’t a God.
There’s nothing miraculous about the path we follow. We believe, and
experience has shown us, that good results come when we put the
necessary effort into our own recovery. This is a program of
empowerment: we take responsibility for our own actions and intentions.
The Sangha is here to help us along the way.

None of us is expected to become an ascetic. We don’t have to become
monks or nuns, and we don’t have to meditate for hours each day. We
don’t have to become Buddhists. But we have found that the path outlined
in the Four Noble Truths can lead us to liberation from both the
suffering of addiction and the suffering that comes from simply being
human, and we trust in the potential in all of us to find freedom from
this suffering.

 The Truth: *Dharma *
=====================

As people who have struggled with addiction, we’re already intimately
familiar with the truth of suffering. Even if we’ve never heard of the
Buddha, at some level we already understand the core of his teachings:
that in this life, there is suffering.

It can be incredibly liberating to hear this said so plainly and
directly. No one is trying to convince or convert us. No one is telling
us we have to believe something. No one is sugarcoating our experience.
For once, it feels like we’re being told the truth.

The Buddha also taught the way to free ourselves from this suffering.
The heart of these teachings (which we call the Dharma) is the Four
Noble Truths. These truths, and the corresponding commitments, are the
foundation of our program:

1.  There is suffering. We commit to understanding the truth of
    suffering.

2.  There is a cause of suffering. We commit to understanding that
    craving leads to suffering.

3.  There is an end to suffering. We commit to understanding and
    experiencing that less craving leads to less suffering.

4.  There is a path that leads to the end of suffering. We commit to
    cultivating the path.

Like a map that shows us the path, these truths help us find our way in
recovery.

**The First Noble Truth: **

*There is Suffering *
---------------------

Some of the ways in which we suffer are obvious, like hunger, pain,
disappointment, and feeling separated or excluded. Some are less
obvious, like feelings of anxiety, stress, and uncertainty. We suffer as
we struggle with aging, sickness, and death. As much as we want to hold
onto the things, people, and feelings we like, we’ll always have to deal
with separation and loss. There’s suffering any time we want things to
be different than they are.

The First Noble Truth rests on the understanding that our lives are
unsatisfactory due to the fact that experiences are impermanent and
impersonal. Our senses (which the Buddha understood to include not just
hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, and touch, but also thinking) are
unreliable and temporary, which means that the way we experience and
make sense of the world is constantly changing. We suffer because we
keep expecting these temporary experiences to satisfy our craving for
pleasure or to avoid pain.

Many of us have suffered by trying, and failing, to control our
dependencies, habits, and addictions. We’ve used every kind of
willpower, bargaining, planning, and magical thinking, each time
imagining the result would be different, and beating ourselves up when
it turned out the same.

How many times did we promise: “Just this one last time, then I’m done?
I’ll just use or drink on the weekends, or only after work, or only on
special occasions. I’ll never drink in the morning. I won’t do the hard
stuff. I’ll never get high alone. I’ll never use at work or around my
family. I’ll never drink and drive. I’ll never use needles.”

How many diets have we tried? How many times have we said we wouldn’t
binge, or purge, or restrict calories, or over-exercise?

How many times have we looked at the scars on our arms and vowed to
never cut again? How many times have we let our wounds heal, only to
break them open once more?

How many limits have we set on ourselves around technology or work, only
to get sucked back in? How many times have we vowed to have no more
one-night stands, vowed to stay away from certain people or places or
websites? How many times have we crossed our own boundaries and been
consumed by shame?

How many mornings did we wake up hating ourselves, vowing to never do
again what we did last night, only to find ourselves repeating the same
mistake again just a few hours later?

How many times did we attempt to cure our addictions with therapy, with
self-help books, with cleanses, with more exercise, by changing a job or
relationship? How many times did we move, thinking our shadow wouldn’t
follow us?

How many promises did we make? How many times did we break those
promises?

Having suffered and struggled with addiction in its many forms, we’ve
come to understand this first truth as it relates to recovery: Addiction
is suffering. We suffer when we obsess, when we cling and grasp onto all
of the delusions of addiction, all the impermanent solutions to our
discomfort and pain. We’ve tried to cure our suffering by using the very
substances and behaviors that create more discomfort and pain. In all of
our attempts to control our habits, we’ve still been clinging to the
illusion that we can somehow control our experiences of the world. We’re
still caught in the prison of suffering.

In fact, we’re reinforcing the walls of that prison, building them
taller and stronger as we act on our addictions.

Liberation comes when we gain a clear understanding of where our real
power lies, and where we are throwing it away.

This is a program of empowerment. It’s a path of letting go of behavior
that no longer serves us and cultivating that which does.

***Trauma and Attachment Injury ***

For many of us, suffering also exists as trauma. Trauma is often
described as the psychological damage that occurs after living through
an extremely frightening or distressing event or situation. It’s caused
by an overwhelming amount of stress that exceeds our ability to cope,
and may make it hard to function even long after the event. Trauma can
come from childhood experiences or from events that occur in our
adulthood. It can be sudden, or it can develop over time from a series
of events that changed how we perceived the world. While trauma
frequently comes from life-threatening events, any situation that leaves
one feeling emotionally or physically in danger can be traumatic.

It’s important to note that it’s not the objective facts of the event
alone that determine how traumatic it is, it’s the subjective emotional
perception of the person who experiences it. Generally, the more terror
and helplessness we feel, and the longer that terror lasts, the more
likely it is that we’ll be traumatized.

*Attachment injury* can be just as insidious and harmful as trauma, and
can have the same impact. It’s defined as an emotional wound to a core
relationship with a caregiver, often caused by abuse, neglect, or
inconsistency of care in early childhood. Attachment injury and trauma
can impact our recovery and meditation practice in slightly different
ways. With trauma we may feel fear (even panic) or distrust when asked
to “sit” in meditation, even when intellectually we know we’re in a safe
place with a supportive group. It may be triggering to be asked to be
present in our bodies and minds, or to focus on our breath. Attachment
injury may show up as a hesitation to trust people or a process, as a
reluctance to be part of a recovery group or sangha, or as a core belief
that we don’t belong. In this case, the nurturing thing to do for
ourselves might be to lean into this discomfort and compassionately
engage and investigate the stories we’re telling ourselves about not
belonging. Again, it’s key to become aware of the nature of the harm we
carry with us. Trauma and attachment injury may require different ways
of feeling safe and supported. You should always do whatever is most
compassionate for yourself in the moment, and seek outside help when you
need it.

Trauma and attachment issues are relevant to suffering and addiction
because the impact can be intense. Studies show that a majority of
people who struggle with addiction have experienced trauma at some point
in their lives. The same system that serves to keep us safe from harm is
also the one that fuels the mechanisms of aversion and craving that
perpetuate suffering. This system can be overactive when trauma is
present because it perceives a very real threat, and the body often
responds with feelings of helplessness, fear, and vulnerability. This
system can be easily thrown into overdrive when one’s life experience
screams: "You're not safe! Danger! Danger!"

For some people, symptoms of trauma may be increasingly severe and last
long after the events that originally caused the trauma have ended. Many
of us have intrusive thoughts that seem to come out of the blue, or we
feel confusion or mood swings we can’t tie to specific events. Traumatic
responses may lead us to avoid activities or places that trigger
memories of the event. We can become socially isolated and withdrawn,
and lose interest in things we used to enjoy. Trauma may mean we’re
easily startled, edgy, or dysfunctional during sex or other activities,
or unusually alert to potential danger. Overwhelming fear, anxiety,
detachment and isolation, shame, and anger may become background states
of our activities. There are many other effects of trauma that may be
triggered by social interactions or even during work or meditation—areas
that may seem disconnected from the original events.

Trauma and attachment issues can certainly lead to the fear, anger,
anxiety, and loneliness that are common responses to the experience of
life. But, at a deeper level, trauma makes it harder for us to cope in
general, to form healthy or safe relationships, to develop an identity
in the world, or to defend ourselves. No two of us will react to the
same experience in the same way, but this truth points to the fact that
certain kinds of experience in our pasts can affect our responses later
in life. This is key to understanding dukkha, and to meeting our
experience with compassion and kindness rather than judgment (not only
for others but also for ourselves), which is an essential part of
recovery.

Many of us turned to addictive substances and behaviors as a way to cope
with our trauma. In some ways, running from the pain of our experiences
through our addictions was itself a survival technique when it felt like
we wouldn’t be able to live through the pain of our memories. While this
may have provided some temporary relief, it did nothing to actually heal
the pain of our trauma, and often led to even more pain.

Our trauma is not our fault, but healing from it is our responsibility,
and our right. Developing understanding and compassion toward the way
trauma affects our reactions to events or circumstances *now* is an
important part of that healing.

***Questions for Inquiry of the First Noble Truth: ***

Begin by making a list of the behaviors and actions associated with your
addiction(s) that you consider harmful. Without exaggerating or
minimizing, think about the things you have done that have caused harm
to yourself and others.

For each behavior listed, write how you have suffered because of that
behavior, and write how others have suffered because of that behavior.
List any other costs or negative consequences you can think of, such as
finances, health, relationships, sexual relations, or missed
opportunities.

Do you notice any patterns? What are they? What are the ways that you
might avoid or reduce suffering for yourself and others if you change
these patterns?

How have your addictive behaviors been a response to trauma and pain?
What are some ways you can respond to trauma and pain that nurture
healing rather than avoiding?

The Second Noble Truth: 
------------------------

***The Cause of Suffering* **

As people who have become dependent on substances and behaviors, we’ve
all experienced the sense of failure and hopelessness that comes from
trying, and failing, to let go of our fixations. Addiction itself
increases our suffering by creating a hope that both pleasure and escape
can be permanent. We go through this suffering again and again because
substances or behaviors can only give us temporary relief to our pain,
our unhappiness, and our lost or damaged sense of self.

Our refusal to accept the way things are leads to wanting, or craving,
which is the cause of suffering. We don’t suffer because of the way
things are, but because we want—or think we “need”—those things to be
different. We suffer because we cling to the idea that we can satisfy
our own cravings, while ignoring the conditions of the world around us.
Above all, we cling to the idea that we can hold on to impermanent and
unreliable things, things that can’t ever lead to real satisfaction or
lasting happiness, without experiencing the suffering of one day losing
them.

Clinging to impermanent solutions for suffering results in craving. We
experience craving like a thirst, an unsatisfied longing, and it can
become a driving force in our lives. If craving goes beyond simple
desire, which is a natural part of life, it often leads us to fixation,
obsession, and the delusional belief that we can’t be happy without
getting what we crave. It warps our intentions so that we make choices
that harm ourselves and others. This repetitive craving and obsessive
drive to satisfy it leads to what we now know as addiction. Addiction
occupies the part of our mind that chooses— our will—and replaces
compassion, kindness, generosity, honesty, and other intentions that
might have been there. Many of us experience addiction as the loss of
our freedom to choose; it’s the addiction that seems to be making our
choices for us.

In the way we “must have” food, shelter, or water, our mind can tell us
we “must have” some substance, buy or steal something, satisfy some
lust, keep acting until we achieve some “needed” result; that we must
protect ourselves at all cost and attack people with whom we disagree,
or people who have something we want. This “need” also leads to an
unsettled or agitated state of mind that tells us we’ll only be happy if
we get certain results or feel a certain way. We want to be someone
we’re not, or we don’t want to be who we are.

Conditions or circumstances in and of themselves don't cause suffering.
They can cause pain or unpleasant experiences, but we add suffering on
top of this when we think we “need” those circumstances to be different.
We create even more suffering when we act out in ways that deny the
reality of the circumstances and the reality of impermanence. Craving is
the underlying motive that fuels unwise actions that create suffering.

***Questions for Inquiry of the Second Noble Truth: ***

List situations, circumstances, and feelings that you may have used
harmful behavior to try and avoid.

List the emotions, sensations, and thoughts that come to mind when you
abstain. Are there troubling memories, shame, grief, or unmet needs
hiding behind the craving? How can you meet these with compassion and
patience?

What things did you give up in your desire to cling to impermanent and
unreliable solutions? For example, did you give up relationships,
financial security, health, opportunities, legal standing, or other
important things to maintain your addictive behaviors? What made the
addiction more important to you than any of these things you gave up?

Are there any beliefs you cling to that fuel craving and aversion,
beliefs that deny the truth of impermanence, or beliefs about how things
in life “should” be? What are they?

**The Third Noble Truth: **

### The End of Suffering 

It is possible to end our suffering. When we come to understand the
nature of our craving and realize that all our experiences are temporary
by nature, we can begin a more skillful way to live with the
dissatisfaction that is part of being human. We don't need to be torn
apart by our thoughts and feelings that say, "I have to have more of
that," or "I'll do anything to get rid of that.” The Third Noble Truth
is that the end of craving is possible. Each of us has the capacity for
recovery.

We are responsible for our own actions and for the energy we give our
thoughts and feelings. This means we have control over our own
suffering, because the unpleasant emotions take place within us: we
create them through our response to experience. We don't need to depend
on anyone or anything else to remove the causes of our suffering. We may
not be able to control anything "out there,” but we *can* learn to
choose what we think, say, and do. We come to understand that if our
thoughts, words, and actions are driven by greed, hatred, or confusion,
we are creating suffering. And so, if we let go of these actions, we can
avoid suffering in the future. We can choose to give up the causes of
disturbing and unpleasant emotions, knowing that virtuous actions result
in happiness and un-virtuous actions result in suffering. This is the
true empowerment and freedom of recovery—recognizing that happiness and
suffering are entirely up to us, based on how we choose to respond to
our experiences.

***Questions for Inquiry of the Third Noble Truth:*** What makes it so
hard to quit?

What resources are available to help you abstain and recover?

List reasons to believe you can recover. Also list your doubts. What
might the wise and compassionate part of you—your Buddha nature—say
about these doubts?

Practice “letting go” of something small. Notice that the craving
doesn’t last and that there’s a little sense of relief when you let it
pass. That’s a little taste of freedom.

**The Fourth Noble Truth: **

The Path 
---------

The Buddha taught that by living ethically, practicing meditation, and
developing wisdom and compassion, we can end the suffering we create by
resisting, running from, and misunderstanding reality.

The Fourth Noble Truth is a summary of the essential elements to
recovery, or awakening, called the Eightfold Path. The Path is a set of
instructions, a practice, and a way to investigate and be aware of the
conditioned responses we cling to. These are the eight factors of the
Path:

-   Wise Understanding

-   Wise Intention

-   Wise Speech

-   Wise Action

-   Wise Livelihood

-   Wise Effort

-   Wise Mindfulness

-   Wise Concentration

These eight factors can be broken down into three groups: The Wisdom
group of Wise Understanding and Intention; the Ethics group of Wise
Speech, Action, and Livelihood; and the Concentration group of Wise
Effort, Mindfulness, and Concentration.

Each of us will understand and practice each aspect of this Eightfold
Path in our own way. We develop our wisdom, ethical practice, and
concentration as far as we can in any given moment. As we come to a
deeper understanding of the Four Noble Truths, we’re able to bring more
effort and concentration to letting go of our greed, hatred, and
confusion. Our ethical development will cause us to reflect more deeply
on the sources of our unwise actions.

The Eightfold Path is a way of life that each of us follows and
practices to the best of our current understanding and capacity. The
Path is not a religious journey, and has nothing to do with belief,
prayer, worship, or ceremony. It’s a guide to practice and a road that
leads to a deep experience of the Noble Truths.

***Questions for Inquiry of the Fourth Noble Truth: ***

Understanding that recovery and the ending of suffering is possible,
what is your path to recovery and ending the suffering of addiction? Be
honest about the challenges you might face, and the tools and resources
you will use to meet those challenges.

What behavior can you change to more fully support your recovery?

What does it mean to you to take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and
the Sangha for your recovery?

The Eightfold Path 
===================

We’ve found that it’s useful to make inquiry and investigation a normal
part of our everyday routine, especially when we’re feeling
uncomfortable emotions or facing tough decisions. We can take a moment
to pause and sit with whatever it is we’re experiencing, identify our
situation, and just allow it to be there, with compassion and without
judgment, and then use the Eightfold Path as a guide to go inward and
forward. In any situation, we can ask ourselves: “How can I apply the
Eightfold Path?” It can also be beneficial to use the different parts of
the Eightfold Path as an end-of-day reflection.

Wise Understanding 
-------------------

As people engaged in the world, rather than withdrawn from it, we can
use Wise Understanding to live without clinging, attachment, or craving.
By paying attention to our actions and the results of those actions, we
can begin to change where our choices are leading. If we intend to act
in ways that have positive results, and if we’re aware of the true
intention and the nature of our actions, then we’ll see better
results—*better* meaning less suffering and less harm.

The word *karma* literally means “action” or “doing.” Any kind of
intentional act—mental, verbal, or physical—is a kind of karma. Skillful
or wise actions strengthen our sense of balance, kindness, compassion,
loving, and equanimity. When we act unskillfully or unwisely—when we
steal, lie, take advantage of somebody else, or cause intentional harm
based on our own craving or delusions—it creates an immediate sense of
imbalance. It fights with our intention to avoid harming others. Karma
is determined by our intention and applies to any
volitional—purposeful—action. The result of our volitional actions may
be an increase in our happiness or may lead to additional suffering.
There is no actor apart from action, and there is no action without
intention.

Unskillful actions leave us less able to meet the next challenge or pain
we are faced with. For example, when we steal, we have to immediately
justify to ourselves why our greed was more important than the harm we
caused by taking. We must create a cover story, hide our actions, and
adjust to the fear of getting caught. Ultimately, if the theft gets
discovered, we might have to deal with financial or legal consequences,
or face a lack of trust from our community. Similarly, when we’re
dishonest, we immediately focus energy on maintaining the untruth. We
must emotionally carry the potential pain that is caused to others, and
ourselves, if the lie is revealed.

This understanding of karma rests on the insight that we are responsible
for our own happiness and misery, and that there is a cause to every
experience of happiness or misery. From a Buddhist point of view, our
choices— which are dependent on our present mental, moral, intellectual,
and emotional conditions—decide the effects of our actions. If we act
skillfully, with understanding and compassion, it’s possible to cause
positive, beneficial effects for ourselves and others. If we act with
unskillful intention, we cause our own suffering.

This doesn’t mean that we always have control over our experiences. No
matter how skillfully we act, the external world—people, places, and
things—might not give us what we want. This does not mean we have “bad
karma,” or that we’ve failed. It just means that we’re not in control of
everything and everyone. The point is that, regardless of what the
outside world throws at us, we’re responsible for how we respond to it
and how we tend to our internal world. At the end of the day, we have
the choice whether we go to bed as somebody who acted wisely and
compassionately, or as somebody who didn’t.

It’s important to note that being responsible for our own happiness and
suffering doesn’t mean we’re responsible for hurts or traumas that have
been done to us by others, or by circumstances out of our control. Many
of us have very real experiences of victimization, oppression, and
trauma through no fault of our own. The pain from these experiences
should be met with compassion and care, not minimized or pushed away. In
recovery, we learn that we don’t have to add an extra layer of suffering
to this pain. We can begin to heal, rather than let these experiences
control and limit us. Without discounting or ignoring the ongoing
effects of trauma in our lives, we begin to understand that our
reactions when that trauma comes up for us now can change our experience
of suffering and happiness.

The Buddhist perspective is that our present mental, moral,
intellectual, and emotional circumstances are the direct result of our
actions and habits, both past and present. How we choose to respond when
confronted with pain or discomfort will change our ability to skillfully
deal with suffering when it arises. We can also take solace in the fact
that we’re not alone, that every person has difficult and unpleasant
experiences. It’s how we *respond* to pain that determines our
experience.

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Understanding: ***

Think of a situation in your life that is causing confusion or unease.

-   What is the truth of this situation?

-   Are you seeing clearly, or are you getting lost in judgment, taking
    things personally in stories you’re telling yourself, or repeating
    past messages you’ve internalized? How?

-   Is your vision clouded by greed, hatred, confusion, clinging,
    attachment, or craving? How?

In what situations and parts of your life do you have the most
difficulty separating desire from need? Are there areas or relationships
where the drive to get what you desire overshadows any other
consideration? Has this changed as you began or continue in recovery?

Are there parts of your life where you are driven to continue unpleasant
experiences because you think you “must” or “need to?”

How is karma—the law of cause and effect—showing up right now? Where in
your life are you dealing with the effects or aftermath of action you
took in the past, both positive and negative?

Wise Intention 
---------------

Wise Intention describes the attitude or approach we take toward
ourselves and the world. We can choose nonharming by avoiding actions
that have harmful results, detaching from the cravings that seem
overwhelming in the moment, and developing a kind and compassionate
stance toward both ourselves and the world. Wise Intention leads us to
stop doing things based on ill-will, hatred, violence, and selfishness.
It impacts all our relationships: with ourselves, other people, our
community, and the world as a whole.

Wise Intention is deciding to act in ways that produce good karma and to
avoid actions that produce bad karma. We start by looking at the kinds
of thoughts that cause us to act in wholesome or unwholesome ways. If
our thoughts are based on confusion, fear, and greed, then our actions
will bring bad results. If our thoughts are based on generosity,
compassion, and avoiding clinging, then our actions will bring good
results. Thoughts that are based in lovingkindness and goodwill, that
are free from the desire or intention to cause harm, lead us to act in a
wholesome manner.

There may be times when we don’t necessarily *want* to act in a
wholesome manner. We may know what’s the right thing to do, but just
don’t want to do it. It’s in these moments when we can focus on our
intention. Maybe we aren’t ready to do the difficult thing, to quit a
certain behavior, to set a boundary, or forgive someone for whom we hold
a resentment. But we can set the *intention* to do so, and investigate
our willingness in meditation by repeating statements like “May I have
the willingness to forgive…. May I have the willingness to quit smoking
(or skip that piece of cake, or stay off the internet tonight, etc.)….
May I have the willingness to make amends to my partner.”

The first choice we can make in Wise Intention is that of
**generosity**. Generosity teaches us how to let go of our
self-centeredness, to let go of clinging to ideas of “mine” and “me.”
Selfishness, or self-centeredness, is one of the ways we justify and
cling to our addictive behaviors. Generosity comes from the awareness
that we’re holding on too tightly to our selfishness in a given moment.
The karmic result of looking at the world only through the lens of “me”
and “mine” and “what I want” leads to loneliness, separation, and
dissatisfaction. Letting go of this clinging can be the solution.

Without generosity, the mind is confined to a small, tight space.
Anything that’s not about “me and mine” is off limits. During times in
our lives when we become dependent, our world becomes focused on
satisfying our cravings, on holding onto what we want right now. We get
sucked into the reactivity of survival mode, believing that we must have
our addictive substance or behavior to survive. Our “needs” for relief
or pleasure consume us, and we become blind to the needs of those around
us. We may even begin to see them as threats.

We can break out of this cycle by opening our hearts: by being present
for, and in service to, other people. Generosity allows space to respond
to those around us, to include their well-being in our choices. This
can, of course, be a tricky concept for those of us who struggle with
issues of codependency. Generosity does not mean giving of ourselves
without boundaries until we are depleted. It does not mean using
“helping” as a form of manipulation to get what we want. Again, what’s
important here is that we’re honest about the *intention* behind our
actions.

We try not to confuse intention with impact. Our intention may be to not
harm, but sometimes the impact is that we hurt someone. Many of us have
experienced this in our addictions. Without intending to, and often
without even being aware of it, we’ve created wreckage in other people’s
lives. The way we choose to practice compassion in recovery is by being
accountable when our actions hurt someone, and by acknowledging this
hurt without blame or shame, defensiveness or justification.

Generosity allows us to cultivate **appreciative joy,** which is one of
the four **heart practices** of Buddhism, along with compassion,
lovingkindness, and equanimity. Joyful appreciation is simply being
happy when somebody else has good fortune, happiness, and peacefulness.
Generosity lets us appreciate the happiness of others rather than having
feelings of envy, jealousy, or wanting them to be just a bit less happy
so we seem a little more happy by comparison. We want the other person’s
happiness to increase, for them to become more at peace, and so we learn
to appreciate those things in their lives. In the moment of giving, of
generosity, we’ve let go of self-centered desire and grasping what is
“mine,” or what brings me pleasure. We’re giving up any ill-will or
aversion we feel toward the person and toward the world. Instead of
creating separation and withdrawal, we’re actively fostering
appreciation for the closeness and connectedness of the world.

This is a joy that’s not weighed down by selfish desires, envy, or
resentment. It’s the purity of happiness for someone else’s good
fortune. We can choose to cultivate this feeling of joy in the happiness
and success of others, without the need to compete or compare. It’s
actually a feeling that’s natural to humans, but it’s often neglected
when our attention is focused on selfish craving. This is the true seat
of generosity: delighting in the happiness of others, without needing
anything in return.

The second heart practice is **compassion**, which is first of all a
willingness to come close to pain: to recognize it, honor it,
acknowledge it, and respond to it wisely. This isn’t easy, because just
as we want to run from or suppress our own pain, we also want to avoid
being with the pain of others. Compassion means sitting with our own
pain *and* that of others. It stops the cruelty of indifference.
Compassion for ourselves is crucial. Selfcompassion is the key to
healing the shame and guilt that we often feel as we begin to recognize
the harms we caused through our addictions.

Compassion is not just offering sympathy and a helping hand. It’s also
an intention to avoid causing harm to others and ourselves. This is
where we can most easily see the difference between skillful and
unskillful actions, and between wholesome and unwholesome intentions.
Cruelty—and all the harm it creates in the world—comes from a lack of
compassion. Cruelty is a desire to cause pain. Compassion is caring
about the welfare and happiness of others. Compassion rests on the
renunciation of harming living beings and is not only the wish, but also
the intention to put an end to their suffering. We need to open our
hearts—not just our minds—to all the suffering that is here, that is
experienced in the world. Compassion is not only a feeling: it is an
action.

The third heart practice is **lovingkindness**, also known as
***metta***. These are thoughts that are free from ill-will, simply
wishing that somebody else be happy, that they be well, and free from
suffering. It’s the choice to include the well-being of everyone in how
we act in the world. Metta isn’t conditional: it isn’t something we
offer only to people we like. We can have concern and care even when
we’re feeling our own pain. We can bring metta to mind when we’re faced
with difficulty or torn by conflicting feelings about the conditions of
life at the moment. Metta doesn’t depend on people acting in a certain
way, on our feeling a certain way in the moment, or on the result of our
caring. It frees us from only caring about the well-being of others when
we think it will lead to some outcome. With metta, we don’t ask the
question “Will it do any good to care about this person’s well-being?”

This means that how we think about another person isn’t based on their
behavior, or even on the other person at all. How we think about a
person is up to us—and if it’s shaped by the practice of metta, then we
can care about every person’s well-being, even the most difficult and
unpleasant people we know. We can honestly hope that everyone finds a
way to be happy without causing harm. Wishing this goodwill towards
others frees us from the reactivity and anger that can come when we
focus on the person’s behavior or what we think they “ought” to do. We
can begin to see the suffering and pain that somebody experiences as a
result of their actions, and care about that pain even if it might also
lead to pain for us or for others. Our wish is that all beings are free
from pain and suffering, that they escape hatred and fear, that they are
at ease, and that they find happiness.

Generosity, compassion, and lovingkindness make **forgiveness** not only
possible, but also essential for recovery. Forgiveness rests on
understanding and caring about the pain and confusion that give rise to
actions that we experience as harmful. We forgive when we focus on the
person, rather than the action. And we forgive only in the present when
our hurt and anger make us aware that our resentment is blocking our own
compassionate and generous responses. In this way, forgiveness is not so
much something we are giving to the person who hurt us, but something we
give to ourselves. It’s centered more on our own conscious intention in
how we choose to respond to them. Just as we sometimes act out of fear,
greed, or confusion, we see that others do so, too. Forgiveness doesn’t
mean we accept or tolerate harm. It comes from understanding and
accepting that the person causing us harm is doing so from a place of
pain and confusion. We extend compassion and goodwill to that person,
even as we actively try to end the harm. This may mean creating safe
boundaries or removing ourselves from exposure to harm. But we do this
from a place of compassion and understanding, not resentment.

And it is *essential* that we extend the healing of forgiveness and
compassion to ourselves. Forgiveness allows us to let go of the guilt
and shame of our own harmful actions. We remember that compassion is an
action, so when we forgive ourselves we also set an intention not to
re-create or continue the harm we have caused to others and to
ourselves.

Making amends is an important part of forgiveness. As we begin to gain
clarity about the harm we caused in our addiction, we commit to make
amends for that harmful behavior. We don’t make amends for the sake of
satisfying some external standard of morality, to be forgiven, or to get
something in return. Instead, we use the process as a way to let go of
our expectations and disappointments in others and ourselves—in other
words, to let go of our attachment to a different past.

One of the central principles of karma is that I alone am responsible
for the way my past actions impact my *current* responses to the world.
We change our habits by letting go of the past and restoring balance in
our relationships. Things we did in the past create patterns of behavior
that continue to shape our thoughts and intentions in the present. That
process doesn’t stop until we change our relationship with those
patterns, and toward the people we’ve harmed. Amends are about restoring
the balance in our relationships, not about asking for forgiveness from
others. In a sense, it is an action we take to forgive ourselves.

When we have come to understand and face the reality of our impact on
others, we begin to understand the purpose of making amends. Our
compassion practice leads to a desire to relieve the suffering of people
we’ve harmed, and a commitment to not cause further suffering. Even if
the person isn’t a part of our lives any longer, it’s possible to
acknowledge their hurt and to offer them our goodwill and our remorse.
Making amends means we do what we can to remedy the harm or wrong. If
that is not possible, we resolve to do some good, not as compensation,
but to develop our habits in a different direction. When we
intentionally take responsibility for our actions, we let go of harmful
avoidance and self-judgment and develop a sense of connectedness, peace,
and ease. The starting place for amends is a willingness to forgive
ourselves and take the path of reconciliation: not only with those we
have harmed, but also with our own hearts and minds.

Generosity, compassion, lovingkindness, and forgiveness allow us to
experience **equanimity** as we face pain and discomfort, both in
ourselves and others. Equanimity is the fourth of the heart practices.
During our addictions, we often responded to situations that caused us
anger, fear, or resentment with a craving that the situations be
different. We gave up and surrendered to the negative experience of
life. Equanimity does not mean giving up; it is more a quality of giving
*in*. It is finding peace exactly where we are, regardless of external
circumstances. Equanimity allows us to be right in the middle of things,
to understand and accept things as they are without needing to escape.
When we gave up, we said, “I don’t care what happens.” Equanimity, on
the other hand, is being able to say, “I can be present for this.” It’s
the acceptance that while there are some things we cannot change, we
still have power over how we respond to them. While we don’t always have
control over our thoughts and feelings, we do have power over how we
feed them.

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Intention: ***

During your periods of addictive behavior, how did you act in ways that
were clinging, uncaring, harsh, cruel, or unforgiving? Toward whom
(including yourself) were these feelings directed? How might generosity,
compassion, lovingkindness, and forgiveness have changed your behavior?

What actions have you taken that have harmed others?

Have you formed an intention to reconcile with both yourself and the
person or people you’ve harmed (to make amends)? If so, have you found a
wise friend or mentor you can go to for guidance and support in the
amends process, which is summarized below? What support can this person
provide as you begin the process of amends?

***Making Amends: ***

-   Have you done something intentionally that you now recognize caused
    harm to another? Who has been harmed by your actions?

-   Have you honestly formed the intention not to repeat harmful actions
    and to learn from the experience in future interactions? Have you
    begun the process of directly addressing the harmful actions of your
    past?

-   Making amends depends on the circumstance, including your present
    relationship to the person and the extent to which you can undo the
    harm caused through direct actions (like correcting a public
    dishonesty or compensating another for things you have taken that
    were not freely offered). Ask yourself, “What can I do in the
    present?”

-   Can you address and reconcile with the harm you have caused without
    forming an attachment to being forgiven? Identify the motivation for
    making each amends.

-   What actions would restore balance in your own feelings and approach
    to whatever harm you have caused? Can these steps be taken without
    causing new harm to the person or the relationship?

If you’re experiencing a difficult situation or choice in your life
right now, investigate the intention you are bringing to this situation.

-   Are you being selfish or self-seeking? How?

-   Are you being driven by aversion (running away from an unpleasant
    experience) or craving (grasping for pleasure)? How?

-   How could you bring in a spirit of generosity, compassion,
    lovingkindness, appreciative joy, and forgiveness to this situation?

-   How would this situation look different if you brought these factors
    to mind *before* reacting or responding?

-   If you don’t want to, can you at least have the intention and
    willingness to do so?

Wise Speech 
------------

Wise Speech is based on the intention to do no harm. We’ve all used
speech in a manner that may create harm: lying to keep others from
knowing what’s really going on; gossiping with the intention of putting
someone down or satisfying our desire to be recognized; ”stealing” time
and attention by chattering on and on; or trying to convince others to
meet our own needs at the expense of their own. Wise Speech includes all
the ways we use our voices, including in writing and online.

The most basic foundation of Wise Speech is honesty or truthfulness.
Dishonesty is not just outright lies; it can also take the form of
exaggeration, minimizing, or omitting, all with the intention of
presenting a false picture or distorting what something actually is. It
can take the form of “white lies” to avoid embarrassment or exposure,
half-truths to keep from being caught, or seemingly harmless things said
at the expense of others.

We may say more than we really know to be true in the hopes of appearing
smarter or more confident in our position or feeling. Sometimes we say
something before we know the truth.

Dishonesty has to do with our intention in speech–are we motivated by
greed, fear, or confusion? Or are we motivated by a sincere desire to
express what’s true, what’s useful, what’s kind, and what’s timely? Wise
Speech means we speak with the intention of not causing harm, and of
fostering safety and security in our community.

In active addiction, we develop the habit of dishonesty. We lie to cover
up or mislead others about the nature and extent of our using and
behavior. We lie so we can satisfy the craving our fixation feeds, by
hiding our actions, our feelings, or the amount of money and effort we
put into satisfying our craving. Many of us lie just for the sake of
lying—because the truth represents a reality we can’t tolerate. We get
trapped by our secrets, and for many of us, having a double life becomes
an addiction all its own. This is why honesty is foundational to
recovery. Dishonesty is one of the habits that allow our addictive
behaviors to flourish. As a result, recovery needs to start with an
honest appraisal of exactly what lies we told and what dishonesty we
spread during our addictive behavior.

The Buddha provided some guidelines for Wise Speech, in addition to
truthfulness. He said to avoid slander and gossip, recognizing that such
unwise speech causes conflict and makes the community less safe. So,
when we talk about others, we can ask ourselves: What’s our intention?
Is it to cause division or exclusion? Is it to cause shame or
embarrassment in someone else, or to somehow make ourselves look better
at somebody else’s expense? It’s possible to talk about other people
with the intention of kindness, generosity, and compassion, to seek
understanding or support for another. Gossip and slander don’t do this
and instead, cause harm. Similarly, idle chatter and saying things just
to be heard or recognized, or to take up time when we’re uncomfortable,
can lead people to dismiss or ignore us and may create impatience and
intolerance in a community.

Wise Speech also involves the *tone* we use when we talk. If we express
ourselves in harsh, angry, or abusive ways, we may not be heard even if
we’re being truthful. Speaking gently, with the intention of kindness,
fosters a community of friendliness and safety.

It may sound like Wise Speech is primarily about discerning when *not*
to speak, but this isn’t always the case. Many of us grew up in families
where it wasn’t safe to talk openly about our thoughts and feelings.
Some, because of certain experiences or cultural conditioning, have been
taught that we don’t have permission to use our voices. For many of us,
practicing Wise Speech may mean learning how to use our voices that have
been silenced, how to wisely communicate the needs and boundaries we’ve
gotten used to keeping hidden. Many of us, in an effort to be liked or
for fear of rocking the boat, have favored being nice over being honest
and true to ourselves. But Wise Speech teaches us that speaking up, even
when it’s hard, is sometimes the wise choice, and that speech is never
truly kind if we cause harm to ourselves.

A final part of Wise Speech is careful listening. We must listen with
compassion, understanding, and receptivity. It can be really helpful to
observe how much of the time we spend “listening” to someone else is
actually spent judging them or planning what we’re going to say in
response. Deep listening—without selfishness, or an agenda—is an act of
generosity that lets us build true connection.

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Speech:*** Have you caused harm with
your speech? How?

Have you been dishonest or harsh in your communication? When, and in
what specific ways?

Do you use speech now to hurt or control people, to present a false idea
or image of yourself or of reality, to demand attention, or to relieve
the discomfort of silence? Detail specific instances in which you used
speech to mislead, misdirect, or distract.

Are you careful to avoid causing harm with your speech?

Do you say things you know are not true, or pretend to know the truth
about something when you don’t, to appear more knowledgeable or credible
than you are?

List some examples.

Wise Action 
------------

Wise Action is also based in the intention to do no harm and to foster
compassion, lovingkindness, generosity, and forgiveness. We try to do
what’s skillful, and avoid actions that are unskillful. Wise Action asks
that we try to make choices based on understanding and not unthinking
habits or ignorance.

The Buddha suggested that we make a commitment to avoid five specific
actions that cause harm, a commitment which is known as the **Five
Precepts**. We commit to the Five Precepts as our basic ethical system:

1.  We set the intention to avoid taking the life of another living
    being, or from causing harm to ourselves or another living being.

2.  We set the intention to avoid taking what is not freely given, or
    stealing.

3.  We set the intention to avoid causing harm though our sexual
    conduct, and to be aware of the consequences and impact of our
    sexual activity and desire.

4.  We set the intention of being honest, of not lying, and of not using
    speech in a harmful way.

5.  We set the intention to avoid the use of intoxicants and
    intoxicating behavior that cloud our awareness.

We need to continually reflect on and question the intentions behind our
actions. We may have moments of clarity, but these can quickly pass,
when old habits or thinking resurfaces. We commit to constantly
reminding ourselves of our intention to Wise Action: to act in ways that
are non-harming.

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Action: ***

Have you acted in a way that was unskillful or that created suffering?
How?

During those times you were unskillful or created suffering, how would
it have changed the outcome if you had acted out of compassion,
kindness, generosity, and forgiveness? Would you now have a different
emotional or mental response to your past actions if you had acted with
these principles in mind?

***First Precept: ***

-   Have you caused harm? How?

> (Allow for a broad understanding of harm, including physical,
> emotional, mental, and karmic harm as well as financial, legal, moral,
> or other forms of harm.)

-   Even if you can’t point to specific harms that you have caused, have
    you acted in a way that purposely avoided being aware of the
    possibility of harm?

***Second Precept: ***

-   People “take” in many ways: we take goods or material possessions,
    we take time and energy, we take care and recognition. With this
    broad understanding of taking, have you taken what has not been
    freely given? How? What are specific examples or patterns where this
    has been true for you?

***Third Precept: ***

-   Have you behaved irresponsibly, selfishly, or without full consent
    and awareness (from yourself or partners) in your sexual conduct?
    How?

-   Reviewing your sexual partners or activities, have you been fully
    aware in each instance of other existing relationships, prior or
    current mental or emotional conditions of yourself and your
    partner(s), and your own intentions in becoming sexually involved?
    How or how not?

-   Has your sexual activity, both by yourself and with others, been
    based on non-harmful intentions? Have you entered into each sexual
    activity with awareness and understanding?

> How or how not?

***Fourth Precept: ***

-   Have you been dishonest? How?

-   What patterns did your dishonesty take? Did you act or speak
    dishonestly to deny or misrepresent the truth about your own
    behavior or status?

-   Were there particular situations in which your dishonesty was
    particularly present (for instance: when dealing with your addictive
    behaviors, in job or professional settings, among friends, with
    family)? Investigate the source of the dishonesty in each setting:
    Was it based on greed, confusion, fear, denial?

> Why were you lying?

***Fifth Precept: ***

-   Have you used intoxicants or other behaviors that cloud your ability
    to see clearly?

-   What substances and behaviors have you become reliant on to change
    or cloud your awareness? Has this changed over time? Or, if you have
    periods of abstinence, were your habitual intoxicants or behaviors
    replaced by other ways to avoid awareness of your present
    circumstances and conditions?

> How?

List ways you might practice the Five Precepts, compassion,
lovingkindness, and generosity in your decision-making.

Wise Livelihood 
----------------

The final factor in the ethical group is Wise Livelihood, which focuses
on how we support ourselves in the world. Again, the intent is to avoid
causing harm. For most of us, our work occupies so much of our time and
attention, so how we choose to make a living takes on special
importance. Understanding the principle of karma, and knowing that
unwholesome activity gives rise to unwholesome karma, whatever choices
or circumstances lead us to a particular job need to be recognized as
having karmic consequences.

We try to avoid jobs that give rise to suffering, and seek work that
does no harm or reduces suffering. The Buddha mentions five kinds of
livelihood to avoid: trading in weapons or instruments of killing,
trafficking in or selling human beings, killing of other beings, making
or selling addictive drugs, or business in poison. We’re encouraged to
avoid occupations based on dishonesty or injury.

Whatever our job is, we can practice it mindfully, with an intention of
non-harm, of easing suffering, and of compassion. This means developing
an attitude toward our occupation beyond just the money we make. We can
develop an approach of service and caring about the effects of our
actions on others, both within and outside our workspaces. Wise
Livelihood is not about judging ourselves or others for their choice of
work or trying to limit their choices. Instead, we try to understand why
and how we engage in whatever occupation we practice. Whatever work we
do, we can maintain an intention of benefiting others.

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Livelihood: ***

Does your job cause harm? What is the specific nature of that harm?

How can you do your job more mindfully and with an intention of
compassion and non-harm?

Do you bring an understanding of karma and kindness to your job, or do
you compartmentalize it and exclude it from awareness of wise action?

What part does greed play in the choices you make in your livelihood?
Does greed get in the way of awareness or compassion?

How can you be of more service in your community?

How might you bring a spirit of generosity to your life, both in your
profession and outside it?

Wise Effort 
------------

Wise Effort is the first of the concentration group. It means
concentrating our effort on understanding and recovery and awakening.
Wise Effort isn’t based on how *much* we should meditate, how *much*
service we should do, or how *much* time we put into healthy activity.
Instead, it’s the intention to devote balanced energy to supporting the
other parts of the path, particularly wisdom.

The first thing to pay attention to is avoiding situations and states of
mind that can lead to unwholesome, unskillful, or harmful responses. We
become more aware of conditions in our lives, and investigate our own
responses and reactions to those conditions. When we’re operating out of
greed, ignorance, confusion, or thinking we can get what we want, we
need to be aware of that.

We put in the effort and energy to understand what circumstances allowed
these conditions to arise and how we can begin to move away from those
responses.

Energy or effort is also devoted to letting compassion, lovingkindness,
generosity, and forgiveness arise when they’re *not* present. If we find
ourselves reacting with anger rather than compassion, fear instead of
generosity, blame instead of forgiveness, we can ask how we would
respond if those positive factors were present, and begin to respond
more skillfully. Being hard on ourselves, beating ourselves up, and
suffering from perfectionism are all familiar feelings during addiction
and recovery. When we shame ourselves for not being good enough, not
trying hard enough, not being enough, these are perfect opportunities to
practice Wise Effort, to reflect on the question, "In this moment, how
can I be kind and gentle with myself?"

In early recovery, we may be most interested in damage control: simply
stopping the destruction and demoralization we have suffered through our
habitual, unskillful responses to craving. We can begin by awareness of
that craving, and learning to make different choices that don’t trigger
the craving. Sometimes awareness is enough; sometimes that’s all the
effort we can muster. As we learn more skillful responses to our
triggers, we gain space to have more compassion, lovingkindness,
generosity, and forgiveness. And as this practice becomes more of a
habit, equanimity and peacefulness begin to replace our habits of
grasping and selfishness. Pacing ourselves is important, alternating
periods of activity and rest. We need to be aware of what our mind,
emotions, body, and recovery can handle *right now,* and avoid the
stress that can come from pushing ourselves too far, too fast. We need
to avoid those things that put us into unskillful mind-states, and try
to do things that return us to a more easeful way of being in the
present moment.

Try to remember that whatever your experience is right now, it will
pass, often in unpredictable ways. Remind yourself that you don’t really
know how long an unpleasant or painful experience will last. Try to be
open to recognizing and investigating the experience while it is
present, without interpreting it as a permanent part of your experience.
Recognizing that the craving, experience, or thought will pass makes it
easier to avoid the impulse to make an immediate, unskillful response.

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Effort: ***

What efforts have you made to connect with a wise friend, mentor, or
dharma buddy who can help you develop and balance your efforts?

Think of a situation that is causing you discomfort or unease. What is
the nature of the effort you’re bringing to the situation? Pay attention
to whether it feels balanced and sustainable, or if you’re leaning too
far in the direction of either inactivity or overexertion?

Are you dealing with overwhelming desires, aversions, laziness or
discouragement, restlessness and worry, or doubt about your own ability
to recover? How do these hindrances affect the choices you’re making?

Are you avoiding feelings by checking out and giving up, or through
obsessive busyness and perfectionism?

Wise Mindfulness 
-----------------

Mindfulness—being present to what’s going on in our minds, bodies,
hearts, and world—is central to the practice of the Eightfold Path. We
learn to be present for the way things are with compassion, without
judging them or ourselves. Mindfulness is being aware of whatever is
present, noticing it, and letting it pass. It’s also remembering that
we’re on a path leading to our freedom and long-lasting happiness.

Mindfulness asks us to be aware and to investigate, without the
reactivity and grasping for control that leads to suffering. We learn to
stay attentive to what’s happening without having to either react to
*or* deny what’s happening. For many of us, our addictions prevented us
from being mindful. In fact, that was often the whole point: we used our
substances and behaviors to avoid feeling, to avoid being aware, because
being aware was painful. But by trying to avoid pain, we often created
more suffering. We’re now making a different choice—to sit with the
discomfort rather than pushing it away or trying to numb it. We can
learn to sit with the discomfort in different ways, either up close and
personal (saying “This fear is simply a bunch of body sensations”) or in
a more distant, non-attached way (“There's the fear and I don't have to
let it control me”).

We’re choosing to respond to it with mindful investigation and
compassion, and to trust that it will pass if we let it. We’re
remembering that there’s another way to respond to life.

Our minds can get lost in how we react to experiences. When something
happens, we almost immediately begin to create a story, plan, or fantasy
about it. We have a thought about an experience, that thought leads to
another, and on and on until we’re far from a real understanding of the
experience itself. Mindfulness is noticing the experience in that moment
*before* we get lost in the judgment of the moment or the stories we
spin about it. Rather than blindly following our reactions and responses
to an experience, mindfulness allows us the space to choose to respond
skillfully and from a place of wisdom and morality.

Mindfulness encourages us to be open to and investigate the painful
experiences (and our habitual reactions to those experiences), rather
than to deny, ignore, suppress, or run from them. Most of us have been
conditioned to be our own harshest critic from early on, especially
during our fixations on substances and behaviors. We carry the shadow of
that judge with us, even as we seek recovery, giving ourselves negative
feedback and scrutinizing every effort we make, holding ourselves to
impossible standards of perfection. Letting go of that inner critic
allows us to be mindful in the present of the efforts we are making,
mindful of the compassion and lovingkindness we’re learning to make a
part of our practice and our lives. Remember that we often talk *way*
more harshly to ourselves than we ever would to somebody else. It’s
useful to notice when we’re treating ourselves too harshly, and then
shift attention to what we are doing well. We can acknowledge the
negative thought, and then gently let it go.

Mindfulness practice is based on what are called the **four
foundations**. The first foundation, **mindfulness of the body**, asks
us to bring awareness, attention, or focus to breathing and to bodily
sensations. Meditations on the breath and body are focused on this
awareness. The second foundation is **mindfulness of feeling and feeling
tones**. This practice involves noticing the emotional tone—pleasure or
displeasure—that comes with every sensation, even when the sensation is
a thought. It also encourages us to notice when a sensation is neither
pleasant nor unpleasant but feels neutral. For example, we can
experience the sensations of breathing–the sensation of breathing in,
the sensation of exhaling–by noticing where in our body we feel the
breath most directly. But we can experience the sensations without
feeling particular pleasure in the sensations of breathing: breathing is
just there, it’s a natural process of being alive. The second foundation
instructs us to notice those sensations that are neutral, as well as
those that are pleasant or unpleasant.

The third foundation, **mindfulness of the mind**, asks us to notice
when attachment—also known as greed or want-ing—comes up, and to be
aware that the attachment arises in the mind. We also learn to notice
when the mind is not attached to a particular thought or sensation. The
same practice of noticing applies when we become aware of aversion,
which we can experience as resistance or even hatred. And, when aversion
isn’t present in the mind, we notice that the mind is free from
aversion.

In the fourth foundation of mind-fulness, **mindfulness of mental
objects** (or of mental phenomena), we begin to simply notice when a
thought arises, being aware of it without judgment or evaluation, and
allowing it to pass away without holding onto it and without creating a
story out of it. Training in the fourth foundation lets us be aware of
thoughts arising and passing away, and that each thought will pass if we
allow it to.

Two simple practices can make mindfulness more a part of our daily
lives. First, we can stop whatever we’re doing at any moment, and pay
attention to the physical sensation of three in-breaths and three
out-breaths. This simple practice grounds our attention in what’s
present right now, rather than in the voices and critics we carry with
us. Shifting from the stories and judgments we constantly create during
the day to this simple grounding practice of three breaths gives us the
space we sometimes need to return to mindfulness of the present.

A second practice is to take time to inquire into the truthfulness of
the negative or difficult messages we give ourselves. First, take time
to ask yourself whether the message is true. Second, ask how sure you
are that it’s true. Are you absolutely certain about what may seem like
an easy or automatic truth? Third, notice how you feel when you believe
the thought: Does it lead to fear, anger, sadness, desire? Finally,
reflect on who you’d be without the thought. How would you feel if you
weren’t caught up in the particular mindset or scenario you’re creating?

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Mindfulness: ***

What are steps you can take to support a regular meditation practice?

What are steps you can take to practice mindfulness more throughout the
day by checking in with yourself about how you’re feeling, and pausing
before reacting to situations?

What are steps you can take to sit with your discomfort instead of
running from it or running toward temporary pleasure?

What are steps you can take to question the “truths” that your mind
tells you, rather than automatically believing them? Identify specific
instances where your mind and perceptions “lied” to you about the truth
of a situation, and how being aware of that might have changed your
reaction and led to a less harmful outcome.

Think about times when you felt fear, doubt, or hesitation. Now, let
yourself become aware of their temporary nature. How might that
awareness have led to an outcome that was less harmful?

Wise Concentration 
-------------------

The final aspect of the Eightfold Path is Wise Concentration. Meditation
practice begins with concentrating on the breath, the body, the
emotional tone of the moment, and the processes of the mind itself,
because these things exist in the present. If we focus on breath, for
example, we’re paying attention to the present moment because our
breathing is immediate: it’s happening *right now*. Breathing is a
natural process that doesn’t require judgment or interpretation, and so
it eases the mind from the need to react.

The purpose of concentration is to train the mind to be focused and
undistracted. This circles back to the wisdom section, where we try to
be focused on wise understanding and wise thought, without being
distracted by habitual perceptions and reactivity.

Most of us, early in meditation practice, are distracted by things
around us. Our concentration is interrupted by a noise outside the room,
a pain or discomfort in our bodies, our own worries or judgments of the
experience, boredom or weariness, or thoughts and plans. These
distractions can lead to a feeling of unease or restlessness. This is
perfectly normal. In our addictions, we nurtured the habit of
distracting ourselves; for many of us, it has become a survival
technique. Concentration meditation gives us the opportunity to meet
this habit with kindness and patience rather than resistance.

Concentration, like the rest of the factors of the Eightfold Path, is a
practice. As with any practice, it takes time and effort to learn a new
way to focus attention. In meditation, simply noting the distraction,
accepting that it exists, and then refocusing, *is* the practice. If we
become consumed with discomfort, thoughts, or distraction, we need to
first recognize that it’s happening, and then become curious about it.
Then we can make the choice to refocus—to concentrate on the object of
the meditation. Our habitual patterns can seduce us into thinking we’re
doing it wrong, into judging our practice, or into giving up. Don’t let
them. When we observe what the mind is telling us and react with
compassion, knowing we have the power to recognize it and refocus it, we
strengthen our ability to concentrate.

Concentration can be especially helpful in times of craving. Instead of
getting lost in the delusion that we must have what we’re craving, we
can trust that the craving is only temporary and refocus our attention
on our intention to act wisely. This may simply be the threebreath pause
mentioned earlier, or a more formal sitting meditation concentrating on
the breath. We can use concentration meditation to train our minds to
focus on a wholesome thought in the midst of temporary discomfort and
the yearning for a quick fix. This may take the form of repeated phrases
to focus and clear the mind, such as metta, compassion, or equanimity
meditations. For some of us, this may take the form of prayer, a
self-affirmation, a mantra, or another form of focused attention.
Concentration practices can often bring a sense of well-being and peace
in a time of turmoil. They’re a healthy way to return to a balanced,
resilient state when we’re stressed or agitated.

Sometimes when cravings or unpleasant emotions are particularly strong,
moving the body can be the best way to help refocus our energy and find
relief. Concentration at those times may mean being focused and mindful
about each movement we are making: *this is my foot taking a step, this
is my hand reaching for the cup.* After a few minutes of concentration
practice, of not giving energy to our craving or obsession, we may find
the intensity of the feeling has passed. The more we do this, the more
we gain confidence that we have the power to relieve the suffering of
our addiction through following this path and committing to this
practice.

For trauma survivors, the breath, the heart, and the mind can be
potentially overwhelming places to place the attention. So if
traditional anchors like breath and body are challenging, ask yourself:
What helps you stay present? What helps to calm your nervous system? It
might be the floor in front of you, or a statue, or a piece of art on
the wall. It might even be just a blank wall. All that you need to be
present is to pay attention to something happening right now.

If you do feel powerful emotions begin to arise during meditation, there
are some simple things you can do to remain present. For example, you
can open your eyes rather than keeping them closed, or give yourself
permission to back off from the practice you are working on. Do whatever
you need to do to take care of yourself should such a state arise,
whether that is taking some deep breaths, putting a name on your
experience (such as “flashback”), or silently repeating some
compassionate phrases to yourself.

Learning to turn our attention back and forth between challenging
sensations and our own supportive resources is a valuable skill that
professionals call *titration*. You can be gentle with your practice as
you are working to develop this skill.

***Questions for Inquiry of Wise Concentration:*** How do you get
unfocused or distracted in meditation?

What distracts you the most?

What are steps you can take to refocus your mind without judging your
own practice?

Notice what value or learning you could gain by carefully and kindly
noticing where your mind has gone, or what has distracted you.

What are steps you can take to use concentration to see clearly and act
wisely?

What are steps you can take to be kind and gentle with yourself through
this process?

Community: *Sangha *
====================

*Sangha* is the third of the Three Jewels: loosely translated, it means
“community.” It’s where Buddha and Dharma find their expression, where
we’re supported in putting those principles into action. It’s a
community of friends practicing the dharma together in order to develop
our own awareness and maintain it. The traditional definition of sangha
originally described monastic communities of ordained monks and nuns,
but in many Buddhist traditions it has evolved to include the wider
spiritual community. For us, our sangha is our community of both dharma
practice and recovery.

We are decentralized and leaderless, and there are no rules to follow
other than that the meeting should be an open, safe, and accessible
space that tries to uphold our core principles of mindfulness,
compassion, forgiveness, and generosity. The advice in this chapter
comes from the collective experience of hundreds of local groups, and so
it’s offered in the spirit of friendly guidance rather than direction.

The essence of a sangha is awareness, understanding, acceptance,
harmony, integrity, and lovingkindness. Recovery begins when we learn to
pay attention to and investigate experience in the present moment. It’s
through the sangha that we first learn to be fully present—that we stop
trying to satisfy our craving and turn to an understanding of our
thoughts, feelings, sense experience, and actions that includes others.
This understanding is fundamentally *relational*. Our actions have
consequences on not only our own lives, but also on the people we meet
and share experiences with. Many of us learned this the hard way—by
hurting the ones we loved while we were in active addiction. A core part
of our recovery includes making amends to those we have hurt, including
ourselves. As we’ve seen, our recovery includes the wise intention to
heal the suffering we have caused others and to act wisely to avoid
creating the same suffering in the future.

Sangha provides the opportunity to practice a central part of recovery:
*remembering*. Remembering means the wholesome reflection that supports
us in our recovery, and energizes our practice of compassion,
lovingkindness, generosity, and forgiveness. Sharing these experiences
with others who are also struggling with addictive behaviors helps give
us confidence in our own ability to recover our true nature, our
potential for awakening. Sangha enlarges our perspective and begins to
give us the self-confidence and self-respect that will let us reflect on
the ups and downs of recovery without discouragement or hopelessness.
When we feel inspired to practice with wise friends, we can trust them
to point out when we fall short of our intentions, and we can be honest
with ourselves.

The teachings of the Buddha clearly state, over and over again, that
this is not just something we can do on our own. And many programs of
recovery (including our own) stress the importance of going to meetings
and working with others in recovery. This is often something we resist,
and not without reason: some meetings are boring; some ask us to believe
things that we feel are untrue; some are depressing or intimidating or
unwelcoming for a lot of reasons. But it’s with the support of others
that so many of us have found relief from the suffering and isolation
brought on by our addictions. And it’s through being of service that
we’ve been able to get out of our own heads and experience a more
sustainable and wholesome joy than our addictions provided.

Many of us have found that there’s a quality to our meditations that’s
different when practiced with a group. Particularly when we’re getting
started, it can be easy to give up or space out after a few minutes.
Practicing with others can often give us the motivation to stick with it
long enough to start experiencing some of the benefits of practice. And
through sharing our experience and listening to what others have to say,
we can see how we’re not alone in a lot of our challenges. This can come
as a welcome surprise after years of suffering shame and feeling like an
outcast.

Many of us, having habitually isolated ourselves, have found that
sharing silence at a meeting creates an atmosphere of trust and can be a
calming way to get used to being with others. No one is required to
speak or participate in meetings: passing is always an option when it
comes time to share. There’s never any requirement to believe in
anything, to identify yourself in any way, much less to become a
Buddhist or serious practitioner. The wisdom and tools are available to
everyone, wherever they are on their path.

But not every meeting is going to be a fit for every person. You may
live in an area where there are several different options to choose
from, or there may be only a single recovery meeting near you, or none
at all. Fortunately, there are also online meetings, many of which can
be joined by phone. You can also start your own meeting.

However you find them, trust that there are wise friends and a sangha
out there for you.

Isolation and Connection 
-------------------------

Addiction and addictive behavior can create people without roots. Some
of us have been uprooted from our families and from society. We wander
around, feeling as though we’re not quite whole, because our addictions
feed our isolation and loneliness. Many come from broken families and
feel rejected by society or have been isolated from society through
incarceration or institutionalization. Not all of us have disassociated
to that degree, but we do tend to live on the margins, looking for a
home, for something to belong to. A community of practice—a sangha—can
provide a second chance to someone who’s become alienated from society,
or just a comfortable place to bring all of ourselves, including parts
we don’t usually share with others. If the community of practice is
organized with a friendly, warm atmosphere, we can find support for our
practice and recovery.

In our addictions, we self-medicated or engaged in behaviors that helped
us deal with the pain of separation. The relief was temporary, of
course, often leaving us more lonely and isolated than before, yet we
returned to it again and again. For many of us, it was the only way we
knew to relieve the pain. Even in sobriety, when faced with well-meaning
but insistent people telling us how to overcome our addictions, the
instinct for many of us is to keep to ourselves. It’s a habitual way of
being in the world that a lot of us share.

It wasn’t just getting high, though for a lot of people in this
fellowship and outside it, that was the main road we took to escape.
There were other traps that snagged us, even if we never struggled with
substances: sex, food, self-harm, social media. We may have tried to get
help with those compulsions, but often found others minimizing or
trivializing them, especially in comparison to drug or alcohol abuse.
For those of us whose primary addictions are around behaviors and
processes, we may have felt alienated and excluded from recovery itself.

Many of us found ourselves like raw, exposed nerves when we stopped
using those ways to escape. And sometimes, the last place we wanted to
be was in a room with strangers in a circle of chairs all facing each
other, talking about how we can’t drink or use or participate in our
destructive behaviors anymore. The paradox is that it’s in that kind of
space, where we’re accepted as we are, that we can begin to let go of
our reflex to hide.

Many of us lost the ability, if we ever had it, to form relationships
without the social lubricant of alcohol or drugs. Sometimes that was
because we dealt with rejection, trauma, or loss at an early age and
became anxious and avoidant around others. Or maybe we just felt
different than everyone else since the day we were born, or came from a
small community (or a big family) and got sick of people nosing into our
business. Whatever reasons we had to isolate, we got to a point where it
stopped serving us. The substances and behaviors we used to protect
ourselves began to harm ourselves and others. We drove people away to be
safe, and as a result we became even more lonely.

Some of us learned to isolate for good reason. People we loved and
trusted harmed us in terrible ways. Some of us lived in communities and
families where we constantly felt unsafe, where trusting anybody too
much could be costly. In recovery, we’re making the scary, difficult,
and brave decision to try it out again.

All humans are driven from birth to seek close human contact. When we’re
deprived of it and even begin to lose the ability to find it, we suffer
and become vulnerable to craving and addictive behavior. The mindfulness
techniques and insights that the Buddha taught are key to recovering
this ability. But it’s not something we have to do alone. In fact,
having people to help and support us on the path is an integral part of
the teachings. So, as it turns out, the solution and the way to get to
the solution are actually one and the same.

A lot of us are perennial outsiders. We’ve felt—often with some
justification—that we have been failed and abandoned by schools, by
religious institutions or the government, and often by our own families.
As a result, we came to mistrust organizations and groups, and even the
idea of belonging itself. The double-bind there, of course, is that
because we never allow anyone to get to know us, we cut off the
possibility of ever belonging.

The Buddha taught that nothing and nobody exists on its own. He said:
"Since this exists, that exists, and since this does not exist, that
does not exist." We’re connected to other people through the way we
interact, through the air we share, through our existence together in
nature. Trying to ignore or resist this interconnection is basically
trying to destroy something which already exists.

This doesn’t mean that we’re *literally* dependent on others for our
life and our existence, but that the life and existence of everybody and
everything develops through their relationships with things outside
themselves: the food they eat, the environment they live in, the history
and the circumstances of their world. It’s a great web of being that
each of us is connected to without any effort of our own. And being
aware of that connection gives us space to have meaningful and positive
relationships with others. It is a choice that each of us has: to decide
what we want to do with the reality of our connection.

Sangha, in a very broad sense, means being willing to let other people
in, to let them matter. To do that, we have to be willing for other
people to let *us* in. When we can even consider the possibility of that
happening, there’s the potential for us to move toward liberation. And
the benefits are felt almost immediately.

All of us, during our development and experience of life, had
experiences that make us doubt our own "voice," or the value or wisdom
of expressing that voice. Many of these doubts contributed to the
suffering we experienced during addiction and continue to make it
difficult to connect to our own recovery. Our meetings are intended as
places where we can feel safe and comfortable authentically expressing
what we really feel and experience. However, many of us, because of
prior experience and experiences in both social settings and in the
recovery community, struggle with this a lot; we often struggle just to
understand our feelings and experiences.

The sangha allows us to start to explore the ways we can find and
authentically express our voices, to value our own voices, and to be
sure that our voices are heard. Your recovery sangha can be one that
focuses on helping and encouraging those many voices.

In the Buddhist tradition, it’s not just that we don’t have to do this
work alone, it’s that we *need* the support of others on the path to
waking up. In a famous story, the Buddha’s cousin and assistant Ananda
came to visit him and remarked, “This is half of the holy life: having
admirable people as friends, companions, and colleagues.” The Buddha
disagreed, saying that “having admirable people as friends, companions,
and colleagues is actually the *whole* of the holy life.”

When we come together to talk honestly about ourselves and what happened
in our lives, something very powerful can happen. When we see people
committing to be who they truly are, in all their imperfections and
their longing to be free, our hearts naturally begin to open because
their realness allows us to be more real. In their vulnerability, our
wise, admirable friends give us the freedom to be vulnerable ourselves,
and to speak our own truths. So our sangha becomes the place where we
are supported and encouraged to stay on the path, even when it’s
challenging or our progress seems stuck. Our wise friends are, without
words, telling us that if we keep going, so will they.

And often, that makes all the difference.

Working with Others 
--------------------

For many of us in early recovery, asking for help feels almost
impossible. But we have found, as difficult as it can be, that it can
literally save our lives, and that with practice, it becomes easier.

However, asking for help is not just important because it may get
results. At times, in fact, it might not. Even with a lot of help and
support, things can still stand in our way. Sometimes, what we want from
the world and from ourselves is just more than what’s available right
then. However, even if asking for help may not always get us what we
want, it will always help get us through. When we practice accepting
help from people who are offering to help, we become just a little bit
more open and a little less stuck. It’s the decision to reach out, as
much as the answer we receive, that can give us what we need to move
forward.

Nevertheless, that decision is often a heavy lift for us. Many of us
have done things during our active addictions that we’re not proud of.
Some of the decisions we made in the past have far-reaching consequences
that continue to impact our lives even after we begin our recovery. We
may have worn a mask of competence, or fearlessness, or blamelessness,
and the fear of what might happen when we take the mask off may keep us
from reaching out. We may be afraid that if we ask people in our lives
for help with financial problems, legal trouble, or any of those sorts
of issues, we might lose them. We might worry that they will no longer
respect us or accept us once the mask is gone, because our fear is that
we’ll be revealed as broken, fundamentally flawed people. We may even be
afraid that there’s just *nothing* behind the mask, that we’re simply
empty underneath.

We practice compassion for all beings, including ourselves, to see the
truth beneath those fears: that there is a loving and lovable heart
within all of us. We come to see clearly that those around us feel more
pain watching us struggle alone that they would if we let them in. And,
of course, by shutting people out and refusing to let them see our
struggles, we’ll often bring about the loss and isolation that we were
trying to avoid in the first place. So, in view of our own suffering and
the pain we can cause to those closest to us, we can see that asking for
help is not selfish. In fact, it is an act of great compassion to
ourselves and others.

Those who have shared the pain of addiction and isolation understand the
fear and shame better than we might imagine. Through listening at
meetings and sharing our own experiences, we begin to see how we’re not
uniquely broken or flawed. And it’s often easier to ask for help from
someone other than those people you’re closest with. In addition to the
people in your sangha, there may be counselors and other professionals
in your community who can be a resource when you need someone with
experience and a greater degree of objectivity. Some clinics and
universities even offer community counseling on a sliding pay scale, so
you may not have to eliminate that option just for financial reasons.
And if you are able to make an appointment, know that some fear and
reluctance is perfectly natural, and shouldn’t be a reason to cancel the
session.

Of course, we know intellectually that our problems become easier to
face when we have help, but emotionally we may still feel fear. Here
again, it’s the decision to give it a try that may be more valuable than
the outcome of the meeting itself. We learn that letting people in and
being a little more vulnerable is not as frightening as we may have
thought. In fact, we may often find that it’s less daunting than the
idea of dealing with our problems all by ourselves.

When we make a practice of asking for help, we frequently find that it
improves both the quantity and quality of our relationships in general.
Even if you don’t become personally close with people in your sangha
outside of meetings, you may find that you are able to connect with more
people on a deep level, and that could be something entirely new in your
life. Even if you are seeking help from a clergyperson, a therapist, or
some other sort of professional, notice how opening up to another person
affects how much *you* trust *them*. Is there a deepening of respect and
feeling of safety as your ability to be transparent grows? This
confidence and security may also bring benefits to your other personal
relationships. Try to notice these changes as they arise, and give
yourself credit for taking steps that are often difficult.

It’s pretty common to worry that sharing your problems with people will
cause them to look down on you, burden them with your baggage, or even
upset them in some way. And while we must be honest in acknowledging
that may be a risk, we also know that remaining isolated can be a much
greater risk to ourselves and to others.

In general, there is a lot of truth in the cliché that burdens are
lighter when they’re shared. Most of us have felt like an enormous
weight has been removed from our shoulders when we made the choice to
not be alone with our problems anymore. And as we experience that
relief, we find that asking for help becomes easier and easier.

The truth, for many of us, is that when we first come into recovery we
may not immediately have easy access to our inner wisdom. Many of us
have been relying on the delusion of fear and shame and reactivity as
our guides in life. It takes time to lift those veils, to dig through
those layers, in order to break those habits and begin to see clearly.
For many of us, it takes time to be able to trust ourselves again. But
we can look to our sangha, to our community of wise friends on the path,
for guidance and wisdom. When we don’t know what to do, when we lose
faith that we can make it through this craving, when we’re lost in
obsession and can’t make sense of our own minds and hearts, when the
world feels upside down, when we are crawling out of our skin with
discomfort, when we have no idea what the next wise step is-this is when
we can and must reach out to our sangha for help. Because they’ve gone
through what we have. They’ve made it to the other side. And hey can
show us how.

Wise Friends and Mentors 
-------------------------

Many—if not most—recovery meetings are focused on meditating together,
reading literature or exploring specific topics, and sharing. There are
no requirements for attendance other than a respectful curiosity, and
attending meetings are a great opportunity for newcomers to visit and
learn about the program. Sometimes, those who have decided to commit to
this program of recovery want more support on the path. This is where
the idea of a “wise friend” or “mentor” comes in.

The Buddha talked about four kinds of friends: the helpful friend, the
kind of friend who sticks with you through good times and bad, the
compassionate friend, and the mentor. A **wise friend** supports us
through example, kindness, and compassion. It can be anyone in the
sangha who we trust to act as a guide, a supporter, a partner, or just a
fellow traveler on the path. This relationship may take many forms, but
it is one built on honesty, compassion, healthy boundaries, and a shared
intention to support one another’s recovery.

For some of us, especially newcomers, it’s helpful to work with a
**mentor**: a wise friend who’s been following the program for a while
who gives support, is there to reach out to when times get rough, and
can help hold us accountable. It’s not a formal position: nobody is
“certified” or “authorized” to be a mentor. They are just members of the
community freely sharing their journey through the Four Truths and
Eightfold Path. Everybody decides for themselves if they want to
collaborate with someone else on their path, understanding that they
must ultimately do the work of recovery themselves. Clear communication
about expectations – from *both* people – is important. There are no
strict rules, but if you are asked to help someone else in this way,
it’s a good idea to have someone who’s done it before to support you.
It’s also strongly encouraged that you commit to the Five Precepts, at
least as far as the supportive relationship is concerned.

Many people form study or practice groups in addition to regular
meetings, in order to give and receive help from wise friends on their
path of recovery. Some folks call these *kalyana mitta* groups, the Pāli
term for wise or admirable friends. Some call them “Dharma buddies.”
Whatever the name, people gather to explore particular aspects of the
path in a smaller group, like practicing longer periods of sitting
meditation, studying the Buddhist texts, or listening to recorded Dharma
talks. There’s no one way to run these sort of groups, and no special
experience is needed to start one. You can experiment for yourselves,
and also look at the experience of established groups for ideas.

There are also groups that have formed to support each other in writing
inquiries or investigations of how their addictive behavior led to
suffering. This is a powerful technique for self-discovery and
liberation, and like most things in this program, there is no one
“right” way to do it. Some approach it in the same way as inventories in
12-Step programs, and some don’t. The goal is not to cause shame or to
dwell on past traumas, but rather to turn toward the pain and confusion
we have been running from and learn to meet it with kindness,
forgiveness, and compassion. You may consider using the Questions for
Inquiry in this book as a starting place for your own exploration, and
there are also a number of other written formats available.

If you need help, know that you’re a part of the broader community of
wise friends: the sangha of people using Buddhism for recovery. It’s
strongly encouraged for at least one person in the group to have someone
they can check in with about best practices and safety. Especially when
we are working with difficult aspects of our pasts, holding safe space
will require wisdom and compassion from all members.

At any time, in groups as well as in every aspect of our lives, the
reminder is that when in doubt, we can be present and we can be kind.

Service and Generosity 
-----------------------

Different schools of Buddhism have slightly different lists of strengths
or good qualities that lead a person to enlightenment. First on every
one of those lists, though, is *dāna*, or generosity. We often think of
generosity in terms of money, and many groups use the word dāna to
describe the donations that members give to help support the meeting. In
the Buddhist tradition, though, dāna is *any* act of giving - not just
money but also food, time, or our attention - without expecting anything
in return. You may already be familiar with the emphasis that many
recovery programs put on service, which is perfectly in line with this
ancient teaching. The merit of this practice has been central to many
religions and philosophies down through the centuries.

Generosity with our time, energy, and attention is not only of benefit
to others on this path. As we become more generous, it also helps us
loosen the grip of greed and attachment that caused so much of our own
suffering. From the first time we mindfully put a couple of dollars in
the offering bowl or introduce ourselves to a newcomer after a meeting,
we can start to feel the benefit of being generous without asking for
thanks. In our meditation practice, we learn through direct experience
how our bodies and our wealth are impermanent, and this insight makes us
more willing to do good with them while we still have them. Sharing our
experience at a meeting, or even simply meditating along with others and
giving our silent encouragement and support, is an act of kindness that
benefits both ourselves and our sangha.

Many of us have trained ourselves for years to be vigilant about being
“taken advantage of” or “ripped off.” In some cases, this has certainly
been justified, and there will always be times where we will need to set
and maintain healthy boundaries. But as our practice deepens, we’re able
to do so with an attitude of discernment and compassion. In the Buddhist
teachings, generosity is not a commandment or a “you should,” or an
unrealistic standard that people are expected to measure themselves by
and find themselves falling short. It is, instead, a description of our
true nature, of the open and loving hearts that have always been within
us, but that have been covered up for so long that they were almost lost
to us. The practice helps us to recover this original nature.

As we try to be more and more generous in our meetings and in our lives,
we learn to trust our own innate kindness, and we build up confidence
that we can give of ourselves to others and still be safe. We
continually test what we think are our limitations, and grow in
selfesteem, self-respect, and well-being as we see these limitations for
what they are: defensive strategies that may once have been necessary,
but which have hardened into the handcuffs of habit. The voice of our
attachments may say, “I don’t want to put my hard-earned money in that
bowl,” or “Maybe I’ll do this act of service, but I’ll stop if people
don’t show enough appreciation.” As we practice generosity, we see how
these fears are transparent, how they have kept us small. We begin to
realize that this practice is really about creating more space in our
hearts and minds. As we notice our limits and allow ourselves to go
beyond them, our heart-minds become more expansive, more spacious, and
composed. This brings us greater feelings of happiness and selfrespect,
and gives our practice more strength and flexibility to look at the
conditions of our lives and our recovery.

We can see the benefits of such a practice when we think about the
opposite of this openness, about times when our minds and hearts have
been closed and protective. We felt on edge, uneasy, and we usually
didn’t like ourselves very much. In that kind of a state, we had very
few resources to deal with any discomfort or confusion. We were often
thrown off balance by even small setbacks. Painful or difficult
experiences often overwhelmed us and sent us running for the temporary
relief of substances or behaviors.

As we get more comfortable with a generous, open heart, we experience
more balance and ease. When something unpleasant arises, we don’t have
to worry that it’s going to crush us or overpower us. We have a refuge
we can increasingly rely on in times of trouble. And when a pleasant
experience arises, we don’t cling to it as desperately, because we don’t
actually need it to feel good about ourselves.

We also practice generosity to be of service to others, to extend
healing and happiness to all beings, and to try in some small way to
reduce the suffering in this world.

What we learn as we continue to work with generosity is that the inner
practice of recognizing the emptiness of our attachments and building up
resilience is one and the same as the outer practice of giving and
service.

 Recovery is Possible 
======================

In the pages of this book is a path, a set of principles and practices,
that can lead to the end of our suffering and see us through the damage
that we piled onto ourselves through our addictions. The path is based
on gaining and maintaining *mindfulness* of our feelings, bodies, minds,
and experiences. During our journey, we come to accept that we’re
responsible for our own actions, and that every choice has a
consequence. If we act unskillfully or mindlessly, we will experience
pain in our own feelings, thoughts, and experiences (*karma*), and we
may cause harm to others. We begin to recognize that every thought,
feeling, and experience is only temporary *(impermanence)*, that it will
pass if we allow it to, and trusting this can provide a safe harbor in
moments of craving or pain*.* We start to believe that even the most
difficult, traumatic, and painful actions and events of our past don’t
define who we are today, nor do they define the possibilities in our
future. It is our choices and actions *now* that define us.

At the same time, we can start to notice and reflect on experience
without getting attached to it or to the stories we tell ourselves about
it (*selflessness).* We come to accept that we can never satisfy all of
our desires and craving. We see this in our struggles with impermanence,
with sickness and aging, not getting what we want or or losing what we
have, not feeling loved by those we desire or feeling rejected by those
whose caring we want the most. We sometimes have to deal with people and
situations that are painful or uncomfortable (*unsatisfactoriness)*.

But with clear understanding, we can begin to choose more appropriate
actions and responses to our experience, and it is in this choice that
we find freedom and relief from suffering. When we act with full
awareness of each choice, of even the smallest action, we can begin to
notice the motivations behind everything we do. We can begin to ask, “Is
this action useful or not? Is it skillful or unskillful?” Whenever we’re
confused or feel lost, we have meditation tools that we can use to
simply return to the present moment, to our experience of the present as
it is for us *right now,* and we can check in with our sangha—our wise
friends—for added perspective and compassionate support.

So, what do we gain by practicing understanding, ethical conduct, and
mindfulness? We’re asked to sit with discomfort, to experience it
without fear or resistance, and to know that it’s impermanent. We learn
that dukkha is part of the human condition, and efforts to avoid or deny
it lead to more unhappiness and suffering. We’ve learned that we can
never satisfy our desires through sense experiences, through chasing
pleasure and trying to hold onto it. Every pleasant sense experience
will end, and the more we try to hold onto it and turn desire into need
or craving, the more we suffer dukkha. We’re mindful that
dissatisfaction and unhappiness have beginnings. By tracing the
dissatisfaction or unhappiness back to its root, we can weed it out of
the mind.

We follow the Eightfold Path, which allows us to develop understanding.
It teaches us the karmic advantage of compassion, lovingkindness,
appreciative joy, and equanimity. We learn the quiet satisfaction of
living a more ethical and mindful life.

What we are achieving is what in Buddhism is called **sukha**, or true
happiness. This is not the temporary pleasure that comes from a high or
other temporary sense experience, but the inner peace and well-being
that comes from a balanced, mindful life. It is the opposite of the
suffering and unsatisfactoriness of dukkha. Sukha is freedom from hate,
greed and confusion. It is an expansive approach to life, being able to
sit with and move through feelings of discomfort, dissatisfaction, and
discontent. Many of us have been running from and denying dukkha for a
very long time, but we have found that it is only when we stop running
that we are able to truly access authentic happiness. We can practice
the message:

> I am here.
>
> This is the way it is *right now*.
>
> This is a moment of suffering. May I give myself the care I need at
> this moment.
>
> May I accept this without struggling, but also without giving up.

We’ve started to learn that mindfulness involves investigating our
unskillful actions and choices, both past and present, and choosing to
act with more wisdom in the future. Rather than being bogged down by
guilt or shame about the past, we can use it as a guide to making
different choices in the present. As we devote energy to awakening and
recovery, we’ll learn to investigate our present and our past with
wisdom rather than craving or aversion. We’ll experience the growth of
trust in our own capacity for, and right to, recovery.

As we get a clearer understanding of what we’re doing in our lives, of
the choices we are making and the consequences of those choices, we gain
the opportunity to develop generosity, lovingkindness, forgiveness, and
equanimity. These are central to Buddhist practice, and to our recovery.
We learn to give freely, because we understand that clinging to what is
“mine” is based on the delusion that we are what we possess, or what we
control. We learn to have *metta*, or lovingkindness, toward all beings
in the world, whether we know them or not.

We come to understand that our practice isn’t just for ourselves, but is
based on the interconnectedness and happiness of all living beings.
Recovery transforms how we show up for those around us. We can become
the compassionate, generous, and wise friend whose calming voice and
steadfast support can help others to understand their own struggles and
find their own path to healing.

There is no magic bullet, no single action or practice that will end
suffering. This is a path composed of a set of practices that help us
deal with suffering and respond wisely to our own lives. We cannot
escape or avoid dukkha, but we can begin to be more at peace knowing
there is a path forward: a path with less suffering, less craving, less
aversion, less destruction, and less shame. It’s a path without an end.
It requires effort and awareness. And we don’t have to do it alone.

Recovery is the lifelong process of recovering our true natures and
finding a way to an enduring and nonharmful sense of happiness. In
recovery, we can finally find the peace so many of us had been searching
for in our addictions. We can break through our isolation and find a
community of wise friends to support us on our path. We can build a home
for ourselves, *within* ourselves, and we can help others do the same.
The gift we give to ourselves, to one another, and to the world, is one
of courage, understanding, compassion, and serenity. We all experience
growth differently, and at our own pace. But the most important message
of this book is that the journey, the healing, can start now for you and
for each of us.

May you find your path to recovery. May you trust in your own potential
for awakening.

**APPENDIX**

MEDITATIONS 
============

All meditation involves a combination of both mindfulness and
concentration–*mindfulness* being the more receptive state of observing
the mind and noticing thoughts and sensations; *concentration* being the
more active energy of choosing what to focus on, whether it be a gentle
returning to the breath or training the mind through repeating phrases
or mantras.

The Buddha taught four different ways of meditation: sitting, standing,
lying down, or walking. You can use any posture that suits you, but be
mindful when you are practicing in a group to try not to move in a way
that might distract or disturb others. There are many different
practices to explore outside the meeting, including mindfulness
meditation, concentration meditation, guided meditation, silent
meditation, and moving meditations such as walking, yoga, tai chi, or qi
gong.

Meditation can bring up powerful emotions, especially for those in early
recovery, with histories of trauma, or with co-occurring mental health
issues. Silent sitting meditation may not always be the right practice
for everyone, every time. If you find yourself caught up by overwhelming
emotions, you can “tap the brakes” during practice in a few ways: by
opening the eyes; taking a few deep slow breaths; placing a hand over
your heart or belly; focusing attention on a soothing object; or
imagining a positive place, activity, or memory. Remember to be kind and
gentle with yourself. It’s always okay to take care of yourself during
meditation.

There are many different traditions of Buddhism with many different
styles of meditation. Here, we offer a basic template that you may build
on with some of the suggested options. Meditation is a personal
practice, and we encourage you to explore with a spirit of openness and
curiosity. May you find refuge and wisdom in your practice.

**Basic Meditation **

![](media/image3.png){width="0.16666666666666666in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}*You can use the script below to lead
yourself or others through a meditation. It begins with awareness of
breath, which can be a complete practice on its own. There are also
optional extensions you can use to practice with: Awareness of Sound,
Awareness of Feeling Tone, Awareness of Body Sensations, or Awareness of
Processes of the Mind. Read the meditation until you come to the* ☸
*symbol; then continue with the meditation you selected. *

Sit in a comfortable but attentive posture, allowing your back to be
straight but not rigid or stiff. Feel your head balanced on your
shoulders, allow you face and jaw to relax, with arms and hands resting
in a comfortable position.

Be attentive to what’s happening within your own awareness, right here
and right now, without judgment.

As you sit, begin to notice the **sensations of breath. **

Pay attention for a moment to how your abdomen moves on each in-breath
and out-breath, the movement of air through your nostrils, the slight
movement of your chest and shoulders.

Find the spot in your body where the sensation of breathing is most
vivid, whether it be your abdomen, your chest or your shoulders, or the
movement of air through your nostrils. See how fully aware you can be of
your whole cycle of breathing, recognizing that each part of the cycle
is different from the other part.

(*pause) *

You will notice your attention shifting away from the breath from time
to time. It’s perfectly normal for thoughts to wander into fantasies,
memories, worries, or things you need to do. When you notice your mind
has wandered, try to meet it with a spirit of friendliness. You don’t
need to *do* anything about it. There is nothing to *fix*. Rather than
forcing it, just try to allow yourself to become curious about what it's
like to be breathing right now, and you'll find that the attention is
naturally drawn back to the physical sensations of breath as it moves
through your body.

Stay alert, relaxed, and above all, compassionate, as you maintain
awareness of where the mind goes. Each time you notice the mind has been
distracted or has wandered, gently shift your awareness back to
sensations of breath. (*pause) *

Notice the tendency to want to control your breathing. Let the quality
of attention be light and easy, one of simply observing and noticing.
You don’t need to control the duration, intensity, pace, or the pause
between each breath. Just be present.

(*pause) *

![](media/image3.png){width="0.19444444444444445in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"}☸

As this meditation comes to an end, recognize that you spent this time
intentionally aware of your moment-tomoment experience, building the
capacity for opening the senses to the vividness, to the change, to the
aliveness of the present moment, expanding your skill to be curious
about, and open to, whatever presents itself, without judgment.

Then, whenever you’re ready, allow your eyes to open and gently bring
your attention back to the space you’re in.

Awareness of Sound 
-------------------

![](media/image3.png){width="0.19444444444444445in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"}☸ You may notice that there are
**sounds** that come from inside or outside the space you’re in, sounds
of traffic, the movement of others in the room, or something else going
on. If your attention has been drawn by the sound, just be aware of it.
Stay with it long enough to notice the quality of the sound–vibration,
tone, volume or intensity–being aware of the urge of the mind to label
sound: as traffic, as voices, as music, etc. Try to experience the sound
without the labels we put on it. Practice recognizing it as just
vibrations in the eardrums, just hearing.

Once you’ve noticed the sound, let it go and bring your attention back
to the breath. Let your breath be your anchor of awareness. Each time
your awareness goes somewhere else, you can just gently come back to
breath, without judgment.

Awareness of Feeling Tone 
--------------------------

![](media/image3.png){width="0.19444444444444445in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"}☸ Notice the tendency to **have an
opinion** about things–liking the way things are going right now, not
liking it, or sometimes feeling neutral. This tendency can also be an
object of awareness. We can practice just noticing that there is an
opinion or feeling about how things are *right now*.

When you notice the sensation of liking or pleasure, you can silently
tell yourself, “So, this is my liking mind,” or “Hello, attachment.”
When you notice the sensation of not liking, you may know, “So that’s my
critical mind,” or “Hello, aversion,” or “So this is what it feels like
to want things to be different than they are.” We can learn how to
notice our pleasant and unpleasant feelings about thoughts and
experiences, without judgment and without having to do anything about
it.

As you notice that happening, just bring your awareness back to the
physical sensations of breath wherever it’s most vivid for you, just
riding the entire cycle of breathing, one cycle after another.

Awareness of Body Sensations 
-----------------------------

![](media/image3.png){width="0.19444444444444445in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"}☸ You may notice your attention shifting
to **body sensations**–coolness or warmth, the pressure of your seat on
the chair or cushion, maybe achiness, discomfort, or tension. As you
become aware of each sensation, notice precisely where it is in the
body. Try to notice it in its fullness, how your experience is in this
moment with the actual physical sensations of pressure, throbbing,
warmth, pulling, or tingling, without judgment or labels. Just notice
that it’s possible to stay for a moment longer with that sensation,
experienced as pure sensation, without the labels of good or bad,
pleasurable or unpleasurable. Can you stay with the experience without
having to react to it? Just for this moment, be curious about it: How
big is it? Does the sensation have a texture or weight? What quality
does it have? How is it changing over time?

If there is a strong feeling of physical discomfort that is making it
hard to stay focused on the breath, pause before acting on the impulse
to move. Bring full awareness to the feeling, and once you’re aware of
where that is and understand your intention to change the discomfort,
move with full mindfulness of your action.

Awareness of Processes of the Mind 
-----------------------------------

![](media/image3.png){width="0.19444444444444445in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"}☸ As you meditate, notice **where the
mind goes**, in terms of thoughts: liking or disliking; perceptions or
sensations; hearing of sound; or feelings of peace, sadness, joy,
frustration, or anticipation. Just notice these raw thought forms, and
then return awareness to sensations of the movement of breath.

If your mind has gone off on a fantasy, thought, judgment, worry,
sensation, or sound, just notice in a friendly way that this is
happening and come back to the breath. Recognize that the awareness of
the distraction is important to this experience, both the movement away
from breath and the coming back.

Notice how one thought leads to another, and then another. In those
moments when you get lost in thought or your awareness goes somewhere
else, see if it is possible to notice the moment when that flicker of
awareness happens, when you recognize that your mind has wandered.
*This* is a moment of mindfulness. You can acknowledge yourself for
noticing you’ve gone somewhere else, and then just easily bring your
attention back to breath in a friendly and non-judgmental way.

> **Metta (Lovingkindness) **

Meditation 
===========

Find a comfortable but alert position in which to sit. As you allow your
eyes to gently close, pay attention to the body and see if there are any
minor adjustments that will help you maintain the position for the
duration of the meditation. Rest your hands comfortably on your legs or
in your lap.

We’ll start with a few minutes of concentration practice, just to help
our minds settle and arrive in our presenttime experience. Allow your
breathing to be natural, seeing where in the body you can feel the
breath most naturally. It may be in the stomach or abdomen, where you
can feel the rising and falling as the body breathes. It might be in the
chest, where you may notice the expansion and contraction as the body
inhales and exhales. Perhaps it’s at the nostrils, where you can feel a
slight tickle as the air comes in, and the subtle warmth as the body
exhales.

Breathing in, just bring a gentle awareness to the breath.

Breathing out, be aware of the breath leaving the body.

*(pause) *

You may notice the mind wandering. This offers us an opportunity to
cultivate mindfulness and concentration. Each time we notice the mind
wandering, we’re strengthening our ability to recognize our present
experience. Each time we bring the mind back to the breath, we
strengthen our ability to concentrate. Treat it as an opportunity rather
than a problem.

*(pause) *

Now begin offering mettā (lovingkindness) to yourself. We start with
ourselves because without loving ourselves it is almost impossible to
love others.

Breathe gently, and repeat silently to yourself the following phrases,
or any other phrases of your choosing that communicate a kind and
friendly intention:

“May I be filled with lovingkindness.”

“May I be safe from inner and outer dangers.”

“May I be well in body, heart, and mind.”

“May I be at ease and happy.”

Repeat these phrases several times, perhaps picturing yourself receiving
them. If that is difficult, it can sometimes be helpful to picture
yourself as a child receiving this love. Feelings contrary to
lovingkindness, like irritation, anger, or doubt, may come up for you.
If this happens, be patient with yourself, allowing whatever arises to
be received in a spirit of kindness, and then simply return to the
phrases.

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Now bring to mind someone who has benefitted you or been especially
kind. This may be a loved one, a friend, a teacher, or mentor. As this
person comes to mind, tune into your natural desire to see this person
happy, free from suffering, and at ease with life. Begin to offer this
person the same phrases of lovingkindness and care:

“May you be filled with lovingkindness.”

“May you be safe from inner and outer dangers.”

“May you be well in body, heart, and mind.”

“May you be at ease and happy.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Let this person go, and bring to mind a neutral person. This is someone
you see, maybe regularly, but don’t know very well. It may be somebody
who works somewhere you go a lot, a co-worker, a person you’ve seen at
meetings, or maybe a neighbor.

Although you don’t know this person well, you can recognize that just as
you wish to be happy, this person wants to be happy as well. You don’t
need to know what their happiness looks like. Again, offer this person
the phrases of lovingkindness:

“May you be filled with lovingkindness.”

“May you be safe from inner and outer dangers.”

“May you be well in body, heart, and mind.”

“May you be at ease and happy.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Now, letting this neutral person go, think of somebody whom you find
difficult, or toward whom you feel a resentment, hurt, or jealousy. You
may not want to pick the most difficult person in your life; instead,
choose someone who is currently agitating or annoying you.

Again, offer the phrases of lovingkindness, being aware that just as you
wish to be happy and free from harm, so do even the most difficult or
troublesome people:

“May you be filled with lovingkindness.”

“May you be safe from inner and outer dangers.”

“May you be well in body, heart, and mind.”

“May you be at ease and happy.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Letting this difficult person go, try to expand your well wishes as wide
as you can imagine–to your family, your friends, your community, your
city, your state, your country, to all beings on earth. Notice the
immense depth of your own heart as you offer these phrases:

*“*May all beings be filled with lovingkindness.”

“May all beings be safe from inner and outer dangers.”

“May all beings be well in body, heart, and mind.”

“May all beings be at ease and happy.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Now, letting go of all thoughts of others, return your focus to your own
body, mind, and heart. Notice any discomfort, tension, or difficulty you
are experiencing. Notice if you are experiencing any new lightness,
warmth, relaxation, or joy. Then, whenever you are ready, allow your
eyes to open and gently return your attention to the space around you.

Forgiveness Meditation 
=======================

Find a comfortable but alert position in which to sit. As you allow your
eyes to gently close, pay attention to the body and see if there are any
minor adjustments that will help you maintain the position for the
duration of the meditation. Rest your hands comfortably on your legs or
in your lap.

We’ll start with a few minutes of concentration practice, just to help
our minds settle and arrive in our presenttime experience. Allow your
breathing to be natural, seeing where in the body you can feel the
breath most naturally. It may be in the stomach or abdomen, where you
can feel the rising and falling as the body breathes. It might be in the
chest, where you may notice the expansion and contraction as the body
inhales and exhales. Perhaps it’s at the nostrils, where you can feel a
slight tickle as the air comes in, and the subtle warmth as the body
exhales.

Breathing in, just bring a gentle awareness to the breath.

Breathing out, be aware of the breath leaving the body.

*(pause) *

You may notice the mind wandering. This offers us an opportunity to
cultivate mindfulness and concentration. Each time we notice the mind
wandering, we’re strengthening our ability to recognize our present
experience. Each time we bring the mind back to the breath, we
strengthen our ability to concentrate. Treat it as an opportunity rather
than a problem.

*(pause) *

Now, begin offering forgiveness to yourself. We start with ourselves
because it is almost impossible to truly forgive others while we still
harbor self-resentment.

There are many ways that we have hurt and harmed ourselves. We have
betrayed or abandoned ourselves many times through thoughts, words, or
actions, knowingly or unknowingly.

Feel your own precious body and life, as you are today. Let yourself
become aware of the ways you have hurt or harmed yourself. Picture them,
remember them. Be open to the sorrow you have carried from this and give
yourself permission to release these burdens.

Breathing gently, repeat silently to yourself the following phrases:

“I forgive myself for the ways I have hurt myself through action or
inaction.”

“I know I have acted out of fear, pain, and confusion, and for today, I
offer myself forgiveness.”

“I forgive myself.”

Repeat these phrases, letting the feelings permeate your body and mind.
Feelings contrary to forgiveness, like irritation, guilt, and anger, may
come up for you. If this happens, be patient and kind toward yourself,
allowing whatever arises to be received in a spirit of friendliness and
kind affection, and simply return to the phrases.

*(three minutes of silence) *

There are also many ways that you have been harmed by others. You may
have been abused or abandoned, knowingly or unknowingly, in thoughts,
words, or actions.

Let yourself picture and remember these hurts. Be open to the sorrow you
have carried from these actions of others in the past, and give yourself
permission to release this burden of pain—at least for today—by
extending forgiveness, when your heart is ready.

Bring to mind the people who have hurt you, and then silently repeat the
following phrases:

“I now remember the ways you have hurt or harmed me, out of your own
fear, pain, confusion, and anger.” “I have carried this pain in my heart
too long. At least for today, I offer you forgiveness.”

“To all those who have caused me harm, I offer my forgiveness.” “I
forgive you.”

*(three minutes of silence) *

There are also many ways that we have hurt and harmed others, have
betrayed or abandoned them, have caused them suffering. We have caused
harm, knowingly or unknowingly, out of our own pain, fear, anger, and
confusion.

Let yourself remember and visualize the ways you have hurt others.
Picture each memory that still burdens your heart. Acknowledge the pain
you have caused out of your own fear and confusion. Be open to your own
sorrow and regret. Give yourself permission to finally release this
burden and ask for forgiveness.

Offer each person in your mind the following phrase:

“I know I have harmed you through my thoughts, words,

or actions, and I ask for your forgiveness.”

*(three minutes of silence) *

Now, letting go of all thoughts of others, return your focus to your own
body, mind, and heart. Notice any discomfort, tension, or difficulty you
may be feeling. Notice if you are experiencing any new lightness,
warmth, relaxation, relief, or joy. Then, whenever you are ready, allow
your eyes to open and gently return your attention to the space around
you.

Equanimity Meditation 
======================

Find a comfortable but alert position in which to sit. As you allow your
eyes to gently close, pay attention to the body and see if there are any
minor adjustments that will help you maintain the position for the
duration of the meditation. Rest your hands comfortably on your legs or
in your lap.

We’ll start with a few minutes of concentration practice, just to help
our minds settle and arrive in our presenttime experience. Allow your
breathing to be natural, seeing where in the body you can feel the
breath most naturally. It may be in the stomach or abdomen, where you
can feel the rising and falling as the body breathes. It might be in the
chest, where you may notice the expansion and contraction as the body
inhales and exhales. Perhaps it’s at the nostrils, where you can feel a
slight tickle as the air comes in, and the subtle warmth as the body
exhales.

Breathing in, just bring a gentle awareness to the breath.

Breathing out, be aware of the breath leaving the body.

*(pause) *

You may notice the mind wandering. This offers us an opportunity to
cultivate mindfulness and concentration. Each time we notice the mind
wandering, we’re strengthening our ability to recognize our present
experience. Each time we bring the mind back to the breath, we
strengthen our ability to concentrate. Treat it as an opportunity rather
than a problem.

*(pause) *

In equanimity practice, we’re cultivating a mind and heart that stays
balanced and at ease with our surroundings. In equanimity, we come to
understand that our happiness and suffering are not caused by our
experiences and circumstances, but in our responses to them.

We may begin our equanimity practice by repeating the following phrases
for ourselves:

“I am responsible for my own actions.”

“I am responsible for the energy and attention I give my thoughts,
feelings, and experiences.” “May I find a true source of happiness.”

“May I find peace exactly where I am.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Now bring to mind someone who has benefitted you or been especially kind
to you. This may be a loved one, a friend, a teacher, or mentor. As this
person comes to mind, tune into your natural desire to see this person
happy, free from suffering, and at ease with life.

The practice is to recognize that although we may offer this person
compassion, we are not in control of their happiness. Equanimity helps
us to let go of the outcome and focus on our own practice.

Repeat silently to yourself the following phrases:

“Regardless of my wishes for you, your happiness is not in my hands.”

“All beings are responsible for the suffering or happiness created by
their own actions.”

“May you find a true source of happiness.”

“May you find peace exactly where you are.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Let this person go from your mind and bring to mind a neutral person.
This is someone you see, maybe regularly, but don’t know very well. It
may be somebody who works somewhere you go a lot, a co-worker, a person
you’ve seen at meetings, or maybe a neighbor.

Although you don’t know this person well, you can recognize that just as
you wish to be happy, this person wants to be happy as well. You don’t
need to know what their happiness looks like. Again, offer this person
the phrases of equanimity, recognizing that you aren’t in charge of
their happiness.

“Regardless of my wishes for you, your happiness is not in my hands.”

“All beings are responsible for the suffering or happiness created by
their own actions.”

“May you do what needs to be done to find happiness.”

“May you find peace exactly where you are.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Now, letting this neutral person go, think of somebody whom you find
difficult, or toward whom you feel resentment, hurt, or jealousy. You
may not want to pick the most difficult person in your life; instead,
choose someone who is currently agitating or annoying you.

Again, offer these phrases of equanimity with the intention of
recognizing that they are in charge of their happiness and ease:

“Regardless of my wishes for you, your happiness is not in my hands.”

“All beings are responsible for the suffering or happiness created by
their own actions.”

“May you find a true source of happiness.”

“May you find peace exactly where you are.”

*(two to three minutes of silence) *

Now, letting go of all thoughts of others, return your focus to your own
body, mind, and heart. Notice any discomfort, tension, or difficulty you
may be feeling. Notice if you are experiencing any new lightness,
warmth, relaxation, or joy. Notice if you feel any increase in your
ability to care without controlling, to accept that each of us is
responsible for the consequences of our own actions. Then, whenever you
are ready, allow your eyes to open and gently return your attention to
the space around you.

QUESTIONS FOR INQUIRY 
======================

These Questions for Inquiry are intended to be a useful tool for
supporting our growth and recovery. They can be used as part of a formal
process of self-investigation or inventory with a mentor, wise friend,
or group; as tools to explore a specific life situation; as guides for a
daily self-inquiry practice; as meeting discussion topics; or any other
way you may find helpful on your path of awakening and freedom from
addiction and habitual behavior.

**Questions for Inquiry of the First Noble Truth: **

Begin by making a list of the behaviors and actions associated with your
addiction(s) that you consider harmful. Without exaggerating or
minimizing, think about the things you have done that have caused harm
to yourself and others.

For each behavior listed, write how you have suffered because of that
behavior, and write how others have suffered because of that behavior.
List any other costs or negative consequences you can think of, such as
finances, health, relationships, sexual relations, or missed
opportunities.

Do you notice any patterns? What are they? What are the ways that you
might avoid or reduce suffering for yourself and others if you change
these patterns?

How have your addictive behaviors been a response to trauma and pain?
What are some ways you can respond to trauma and pain that nurture
healing rather than avoiding?

**Questions for Inquiry of the Second Noble Truth: **

List situations, circumstances, and feelings that you may have used
harmful behavior to try and avoid.

List the emotions, sensations, and thoughts that come to mind when you
abstain. Are there troubling memories, shame, grief, or unmet needs
hiding behind the craving? How can you meet these with compassion and
patience?

What things did you give up in your desire to cling to impermanent and
unreliable solutions? For example: did you give up relationships,
financial security, health, opportunities, legal standing, or other
important things to maintain your addictive behaviors? What made the
addiction more important to you than any of these things you gave up?

Are there any beliefs you cling to that fuel craving and aversion,
beliefs that deny the truth of impermanence, or beliefs about how things
in life “should” be? What are they?

**Questions for Inquiry of the Third Noble Truth: **

What makes it so hard to quit?

What resources are available to help you abstain and recover?

List reasons to believe you can recover. Also list your doubts. What
might the wise and compassionate part of you—your Buddha nature—say
about these doubts?

Practice “letting go” of something small. Notice that the craving
doesn’t last and that there’s a little sense of relief when you let it
pass. That’s a little taste of freedom.

**Questions for Inquiry of the Fourth Noble Truth: **

Understanding that recovery and the ending of suffering is possible,
what is your path to recovery and ending the suffering of addiction? Be
honest about the challenges you might face, and the tools and resources
you will use to meet those challenges.

What behavior can you change to more fully support your recovery?

What does it mean to you to take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and
the Sangha for your recovery?

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Understanding: **

Think of a situation in your life that is causing confusion or unease.

-   What is the truth of this situation?

-   Are you seeing clearly, or are you getting lost in judgment, taking
    things personally, in stories you’re telling yourself, or repeating
    past messages you’ve internalized? How?

-   Is your vision clouded by greed, hatred, confusion, clinging,
    attachment, or craving? How?

In what situations and parts of your life do you have the most
difficulty separating desire from need? Are there areas or relationships
where the drive to get what you desire overshadows any other
consideration? Has this changed as you began or continue in recovery?

Are there parts of your life where you are driven to continue unpleasant
experiences because you think you “must” or “need to?”

How is karma—the law of cause and effect—showing up right now? Where in
your life are you dealing with the effects or aftermath of action you
took in the past, both positive and negative?

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Intention: **

During your periods of addictive behavior, how did you act in ways that
were clinging, uncaring, harsh, cruel, or unforgiving? Toward whom
(including yourself) were these feelings directed? How might generosity,
compassion, lovingkindness, and forgiveness have changed your behavior?

What actions have you taken that have harmed others?

Have you formed an intention to reconcile with both yourself and the
person or people you’ve harmed (to make amends)? If so, have you found a
wise friend or mentor you can go to for guidance and support in the
amends process, which is summarized below? What support can this person
provide as you begin the process of amends?

**Making Amends: **

-   Have you done something intentionally that you now recognize caused
    harm to another? Who has been harmed by your actions?

-   Have you honestly formed the intention not to repeat harmful actions
    and to learn from the experience in future interactions? Have you
    begun the process of directly addressing the harmful actions of your
    past?

-   Making amends depends on the circumstance, including your present
    relationship to the person and the extent to which you can undo the
    harm caused through direct actions (like correcting a public
    dishonesty or compensating another for things you have taken that
    were not freely offered). Ask yourself, “What can I do in the
    present?”

-   Can you address and reconcile with the harm you have caused without
    forming an attachment to being forgiven? Identify the motivation for
    making each amends.

-   What actions would restore balance in your own feelings and approach
    to whatever harm you have caused? Can these steps be taken without
    causing new harm to the person or the relationship?

If you’re experiencing a difficult situation or choice in your life
right now, investigate the intention you are bringing to this situation.

-   Are you being selfish or self-seeking? How?

-   Are you being driven by aversion (running away from an unpleasant
    experience) or craving (grasping for pleasure)? How?

-   How could you bring in a spirit of generosity, compassion,
    lovingkindness, appreciative joy, and forgiveness to this situation?

-   How would this situation look different if you brought these factors
    to mind *before* reacting or responding?

-   If you don’t want to, can you at least have the intention and
    willingness to do so?

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Speech: **

Have you caused harm with your speech? How?

Have you been dishonest or harsh in your communication? When, and in
what specific ways?

Do you use speech now to hurt or control people, to present a false idea
or image of yourself or of reality, to demand attention, or to relieve
the discomfort of silence? Detail specific instances in which you used
speech to mislead, misdirect, or distract.

Are you careful to avoid causing harm with your speech?

Do you say things you know are not true, or pretend to know the truth
about something when you don’t, to appear more knowledgeable or credible
than you are?

List some examples.

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Action: **

Have you acted in a way that was unskillful or that created suffering?
How?

During those times you were unskillful or created suffering, how would
it have changed the outcome if you had acted out of compassion,
kindness, generosity, and forgiveness? Would you now have a different
emotional or mental response to your past actions if you had acted with
these principles in mind?

*First Precept: *

-   Have you caused harm? How?

> (Allow for a broad understanding of harm, including physical,
> emotional, mental, and karmic harm as well as financial, legal, moral,
> or other forms of harm.)

-   Even if you can’t point to specific harms that you have caused, have
    you acted in a way that purposely avoided being aware of the
    possibility of harm?

*Second Precept: *

-   People “take” in many ways–we take goods or material possessions, we
    take time and energy, we take care and recognition. With this broad
    understanding of taking, have you taken what has not been freely
    given? How? What are specific examples or patterns where this has
    been true for you?

*Third Precept: *

-   Have you behaved irresponsibly, selfishly, or without full consent
    and awareness (from yourself or partners) in your sexual conduct?
    How?

-   Reviewing your sexual partners or activities, have you been fully
    aware in each instance of other existing relationships, prior or
    current mental or emotional conditions of yourself and your
    partner(s), and your own intentions in becoming sexually involved?
    How or how not?

-   Has your sexual activity, both by yourself and with others, been
    based on non-harmful intentions? Have you entered into each sexual
    activity with awareness and understanding? How or how not?

*Fourth Precept: *

-   Have you been dishonest? How?

-   What patterns did your dishonesty take? Did you act or speak
    dishonestly to deny or misrepresent the truth about your own
    behavior or status?

-   Were there particular situations in which your dishonesty was
    particularly present (for instance: when dealing with your addictive
    behaviors, in job or professional settings, among friends, with
    family)? Investigate the source of the dishonesty in each
    setting–was it based on greed, confusion, fear, denial?

> Why were you lying?

*Fifth Precept: *

-   Have you used intoxicants or other behaviors that cloud your ability
    to see clearly?

-   What substances and behaviors have you become reliant on to change
    or cloud your awareness? Has this changed over time, or, if you have
    periods of abstinence, were your habitual intoxicants or behaviors
    replaced by other ways to avoid awareness of your present
    circumstances and conditions?

> How?

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Livelihood: **

Does your job cause harm? What is the specific nature of that harm?

How can you do your job more mindfully and with an intention of
compassion and non-harm?

Do you bring an understanding of karma and kindness to your job, or do
you compartmentalize it and exclude it from awareness of wise action?

What part does greed play in the choices you make in your livelihood?
Does greed get in the way of awareness or compassion?

How can you be of more service in your community?

How might you bring a spirit of generosity to your life, both in your
profession and outside it?

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Effort: **

What efforts have you made to connect with a wise friend, mentor, or
dharma buddy who can help you develop and balance your efforts?

Think of a situation that is causing you discomfort or unease. What is
the nature of the effort you’re bringing to the situation? Pay attention
to whether it feels balanced and sustainable, or if you’re leaning too
far in the direction of either inactivity or overexertion?

Are you dealing with overwhelming desires, aversions, laziness or
discouragement, restlessness and worry, or doubt about your own ability
to recover? How do these hindrances affect the choices you’re making?

Are you avoiding feelings by checking out and giving up, or through
obsessive busyness and perfectionism?

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Mindfulness: **

What are steps you can take to support a regular meditation practice?

What are steps you can take to practice mindfulness more throughout the
day by checking in with yourself about how you’re feeling, and pausing
before reacting to situations?

What are steps you can take to sit with your discomfort instead of
running from it or running toward temporary pleasure?

What are steps you can take to question the “truths” that your mind
tells you, rather than automatically believing them? Identify specific
instances where your mind and perceptions “lied” to you about the truth
of a situation, and how being aware of that might have changed your
reaction and led to a less harmful outcome.

Think about times when you felt fear, doubt, or hesitation. Now bring an
awareness of their temporary nature. How might that awareness have led
to an outcome that was less harmful?

**Questions for Inquiry of Wise Concentration: **

How do you get unfocused or distracted in meditation?

What distracts you the most?

What are steps you can take to refocus your mind without judging your
own practice?

Notice what value or learning you could gain by carefully and kindly
noticing where your mind has gone, or what has distracted you.

What are steps you can take to use concentration to see clearly and act
wisely?

What are steps you can take to be kind and gentle with yourself through
this process?

 GLOSSARY 
==========

According to tradition, the followers of the Buddha memorized his
teachings when he died in the fifth century BCE. To preserve them, the
teachings were recited aloud and taught to generation after generation
of monks and nuns. They were finally written down, centuries later, in
the Pāli language.

Many Buddhist ideas are still described in Pāli, or in a very closely
related language called Sanskrit, because they are difficult to
translate into English. Therefore, the definitions given below are only
rough approximations, and it may be beneficial to deepen the
understanding of the truths behind these words through reflection and
personal practice.

**Buddha** (Pāli and Sanskrit): a personal title, meaning “the awakened
one" or "the enlightened one;" most commonly used for Siddhārtha Gautama
Buddha, the founder of Buddhism.

**Dāna** (Pāli and Sanskrit): Generosity; charity. Traditionally refers
to the giving of alms or donations to monastic or spiritually-developed
people.

**Dharma** (Sanskrit; **Dhamma** in Pāli): the teachings of the
**Buddha**; the nature of reality; phenomena.

**Dukkha** (Pāli; **Duḥkha** in Sanskrit): sorrow; stress;
unsatisfactoriness; the suffering in life caused by clinging to
temporary phenomena as if they were permanent.

**Kalyāṇa-mitta** (Pāli; **Kalyāṇa-mitra** in Sanskrit): good friend;
wise companion; a teacher or mentor in understanding the **Dharma**.

**Karma** (Sanskrit; **Kamma** in Pāli): action; doing; cause and
effect; intentional activity that leads to immediate and future
consequence(s).

**Karuṇā** (Pāli and Sanskrit): compassion; kindness; the desire for
harm and suffering to be removed from oneself and others.

**Mettā** (Pāli; **Maitrī** in Sanskrit): lovingkindness; benevolence;
friendliness; goodwill; an active desire for the well-being and
happiness of oneself and others.

**Muditā** (Pāli and Sanskrit): the sympathetic, appreciative joy in the
success and happiness of others.

**Saṅgha** (Pāli; **Saṃgha** in Sanskrit): traditionally, the
communities of Buddhist monks and nuns; followers of the **Buddha**,
whether monastics or lay-people.

**Sukha (**Pāli and Sanskrit): quiet joy; ease; unhindered flow; the
opposite of **Dukkha**.

**Upekkhā** (Pāli; **Upekṣā** in Sanskrit): equanimity; evenness of
mind; serenity; unshakeable freedom of mind; a state of inner equipoise
that cannot be upset by gain and loss.

RECOVERY DHARMA MEETING FORMAT 
===============================

*This script is meant to serve as a suggested template. Individual
meetings may choose to edit it or use other formats to meet the needs of
their sangha. *

*Before the meeting, the facilitator may find volunteers to read the
following: *

-   *The Practice *

-   *The Four Noble Truths and Eightfold Path *

-   *The Dedication of Merit *

OPENING 
--------

Welcome to this meeting of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_. We are gathered to explore a
Buddhist-inspired approach to recovery from addiction of all kinds. We
are peer-led and do not follow any one leader or teacher, but trust in
the wisdom of the Buddha (the potential for our own awakening), the
Dharma (the truth, or the teachings), and the Sangha (our community of
wise friends on this path). This is a program of empowerment and doesn’t
ask us to believe in anything other than our own potential to change and
heal. We have found a guide for our recovery in the Buddhist teachings
of the Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path, and we invite you to
investigate these practices and principles as tools for your own path of
liberation from the suffering of addiction. We understand that this is
not the only path to recovery and many may choose to combine these
practices with other recovery programs.

My name is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and I am the facilitator of this meeting. I am
not a Buddhist teacher, nor do I have any particular authority in this
meeting. I am a member of this community and have volunteered to help
lead our meeting and discussion today.

I have asked *\_\_\_\_\_\_\_* to read **The Practice**:

THE PRACTICE 
-------------

> **Renunciation:** We understand *addiction* to describe the
> overwhelming craving and compulsive use of substances or behaviors in
> order to escape present-time reality, either by clinging to pleasure
> or running from pain. We commit to the intention of abstinence from
> alcohol and other addictive substances. For those of us recovering
> from process addictions, particularly those for which complete
> abstinence is not possible, we also identify and commit to wise
> boundaries around our harmful behaviors, preferably with the help of a
> mentor or therapeutic professional.
>
> **Meditation:** We commit to the intention of developing a daily
> meditation practice. We use meditation as a tool to investigate our
> actions, intentions, and reactivity. Meditation is a personal
> practice, and we commit to finding a balanced effort toward this and
> other healthy practices that are appropriate to our own journey on the
> path.
>
> **Meetings:** We attend recovery meetings whenever possible, in person
> and/or online. Some may wish to be part of other recovery fellowships
> and Buddhist communities. In early recovery, it is recommended to
> attend a recovery meeting as often as possible. For many that may mean
> every day. We also commit to becoming an active part of the community,
> offering our own experiences and service wherever possible.
>
> **The Path:** We commit to deepening our understanding of the Four
> Noble Truths and to practicing the Eightfold Path in our daily lives.
>
> **Inquiry and Investigation:** We explore the Four Noble Truths as
> they relate to our addictive behavior through writing and sharing
> in-depth, detailed Inquiries. These can be worked with the guidance of
> a mentor, in partnership with a trusted friend, or with a group. As we
> complete our written Inquiries, we undertake to hold ourselves
> accountable and take direct responsibility for our actions, which
> includes making amends for the harm we have caused in our past.
>
> **Sangha, Wise Friends, Mentors:** We cultivate relationships within a
> recovery community, to both support our own recovery and support the
> recovery of others. After we have completed significant work on our
> Inquiries, established a meditation practice, and achieved
> renunciation from our addictive behaviors, we can then become mentors
> to help others on their path to liberation from addiction. Anyone with
> any period of time of renunciation and practice can be of service to
> others in their sangha. When mentors are not available, a group of
> wise friends can act as partners in self-inquiry and support each
> other’s practice.
>
> **Growth:** We continue our study of these
>
> Buddhist practices through reading, listening to dharma talks,
> visiting and becoming members of recovery and spiritual sanghas, and
> attending meditation or dharma retreats when we believe these
> practices will contribute to our understanding and wisdom. We
> undertake a lifelong journey of growth and awakening.

I have asked \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to read the **Four Noble Truths and
Eightfold Path**:

THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS AND EIGHTFOLD PATH 
-----------------------------------------

> As people who have struggled with addiction, we are already intimately
> familiar with the truth of suffering. Even if we have never heard of
> the Buddha, at some level we already know the foundation of his
> teachings, which we call the Dharma: that in this life, there is
> suffering.
>
> The Buddha also taught the way to free ourselves from this suffering.
> The heart of these teachings is the Four Noble Truths and the
> corresponding commitments, which are the foundation of our program.

1.  There is suffering.

> *We commit to understanding the truth of suffering.*

1.  There is a cause of suffering. *We commit to understanding that
    craving leads to suffering.*

2.  There is an end to suffering. *We commit to understanding and
    experiencing that less craving leads to less suffering.*

3.  There is a path to the end of suffering. *We commit to cultivating
    the path.*

> The Buddha taught that by living ethically, practicing meditation, and
> developing wisdom and compassion, we can end the suffering that is
> created by resisting, running from, and misunderstanding reality. We
> have found that these practices and principles can end the suffering
> of addiction. The Eightfold Path helps us find our way in recovery and
> consists of the following:

1.  Wise Understanding

2.  Wise Intention

3.  Wise Speech

4.  Wise Action

5.  Wise Livelihood

6.  Wise Effort

7.  Wise Mindfulness

8.  Wise Concentration

INTRODUCTIONS 
--------------

In an effort to build community and to get to know each other, we start
each meeting by introducing ourselves. There is no need to identify
yourself by anything other than your name. You can also let us know if
you have a preferred pronoun. My name is \_\_\_\_ (and I use the pronoun
\_\_\_).

MEDITATION 
-----------

We will now do a guided meditation on \_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Your eyes may be
closed or gently open. Meditation is a personal practice, and we
encourage you to explore with a spirit of openness and curiosity. Part
of what we are doing is learning to sit with discomfort, but meditation
can bring up powerful emotions for some of us, and if you find that you
need to “tap the brakes” during practice, you can do so in the following
ways: by opening the eyes; taking a few deep slow breaths; placing a
hand over your heart or belly; focusing attention on a soothing object;
imagining a positive place, activity, or memory; or quietly shifting
your position. Remember to be kind and gentle with yourself. It’s always
okay to take care of yourself during meditation. If you need to get up
during the meditation, please do so as quietly as possible, and please
hold your comments and questions until after meditation.

*(Meetings may be either a Literature Discussion, Topic *

*Discussion, or other format.) *

LITERATURE DISCUSSION MEETING 
------------------------------

We will now take turns reading from the book *The Dharma of Recovery*
(or another Buddhist book), and then open the meeting for discussion.

TOPIC/SPEAKER DISCUSSION MEETING 
---------------------------------

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ *(speaker)* will now speak about \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ *(a topic
related to recovery and Buddhism, or their experience in addiction and
recovery)*, and then we will open the meeting for discussion.

GROUP SHARING 
--------------

*(Meetings choose whether to do tag-pass, facilitator *

*selected, or “popcorn” style sharing.) *

Please limit your share to 3 to 5 minutes to ensure that everyone who
wants to has a chance to speak. We commit to making this space as safe
and welcoming as possible for all members of our community. Please be
wise in your speech by trying to use “I” statements and focusing your
share on your own experience of addiction, recovery, Buddhist principles
and practices, or tonight’s topic. We ask that you avoid commenting on
another person’s share or offering opinions or advice.

CLOSING 
--------

That is all the time we have for sharing. Thank you for being with us
tonight. In order to respect each others’ privacy and to create a safe
environment for all who attend, please keep everything that was said in
this meeting and who was here confidential. We encourage you to continue
your meditation practice, your study of Buddhist principles, and to
reach out to others in order to build community. Would anyone who is
willing to talk with newcomers after the meeting please raise their
hand?

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
--------------

We now pass the basket for *dāna*, which is a Buddhist term for the
practice of generosity. Please give what you can to support the meeting.

*(Announcements about clean up, phone/email list, books for sale, free
handouts, upcoming retreats, or other news pertaining to the group.)*

DEDICATION OF MERIT 
--------------------

We will now close with the dedication of merit:

*(Volunteer may read, or pass out copies to read as a group. Individual
meetings and sanghas may choose to write their own dedications of
merit.) *

> Refuge does not arise in a particular place, but in the space within
> the goodness of our hearts. When this space is imbued with wisdom,
> respect, and love, we call it sangha. We hope that the pain of
> addiction, trauma, and feeling “apart” actually leads us back toward
> the heart and that we might understand compassion, wisdom, and change
> ever more deeply. As we have learned from practice, great pain does
> not erase goodness, but in fact informs it.
>
> May we make the best use of our practice, and whatever freedom arises
> from our efforts here today. May this be a cause and condition for
> less suffering and more safety in our world.
