THE PRACTICE 
=============

**Renunciation:** We understand *addiction* to describe the overwhelming
craving and compulsive use of substances or behaviors in order to escape
present-time reality, either by clinging to pleasure or running from
pain. We commit to the intention of abstinence from alcohol and other
addictive substances. For those of us recovering from process
addictions, particularly those for which complete abstinence is not
possible, we also identify and commit to wise boundaries around our
harmful behaviors, preferably with the help of a mentor or therapeutic
professional.

**Meditation:** We commit to the intention of developing a daily
meditation practice. We use meditation as a tool to investigate our
actions, intentions, and reactivity. Meditation is a personal practice,
and we commit to finding a balanced effort toward this and other healthy
practices that are appropriate to our own journey on the path.

**Meetings:** We attend recovery meetings whenever possible, in person
and/or online. Some may wish to be part of other recovery fellowships
and Buddhist communities. In early recovery, it is recommended to attend
a recovery meeting as often as possible. For many that may mean every
day. We also commit to becoming an active part of the community,
offering our own experiences and service wherever possible.

**The Path:** We commit to deepening our understanding of the Four Noble
Truths and to practicing the Eightfold Path in our daily lives.

**Inquiry and Investigation:** We explore the Four Noble Truths as they
relate to our addictive behavior through writing and sharing in-depth,
detailed Inquiries. These can be worked with the guidance of a mentor,
in partnership with a trusted friend, or with a group. As we complete
our written Inquiries, we undertake to hold ourselves accountable and
take direct responsibility for our actions, which includes making amends
for the harm we have caused in our past. .

**Sangha, Wise Friends, Mentors:** We cultivate relationships within a
recovery community, to both support our own recovery and support the
recovery of others. After we have completed significant work on our
Inquiries, established a meditation practice, and achieved renunciation
from our addictive behaviors, we can then become mentors to help others
on their path to liberation from addiction. Anyone with any period of
time of renunciation and practice can be of service to others in their
sangha. When mentors are not available, a group of wise friends can act
as partners in self-inquiry and support each otherâ€™s practice.

**Growth:** We continue our study of these Buddhist practices through
reading, listening to dharma talks, visiting and becoming members of
recovery and spiritual sanghas, and attending meditation or dharma
retreats when we believe these practices will contribute to our
understanding and wisdom. We undertake a lifelong journey of growth and
awakening.