**The First Noble Truth: **

*There is Suffering *
---------------------

Some of the ways in which we suffer are obvious, like hunger, pain,
disappointment, and feeling separated or excluded. Some are less
obvious, like feelings of anxiety, stress, and uncertainty. We suffer as
we struggle with aging, sickness, and death. As much as we want to hold
onto the things, people, and feelings we like, we’ll always have to deal
with separation and loss. There’s suffering any time we want things to
be different than they are.

The First Noble Truth rests on the understanding that our lives are
unsatisfactory due to the fact that experiences are impermanent and
impersonal. Our senses (which the Buddha understood to include not just
hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, and touch, but also thinking) are
unreliable and temporary, which means that the way we experience and
make sense of the world is constantly changing. We suffer because we
keep expecting these temporary experiences to satisfy our craving for
pleasure or to avoid pain.

Many of us have suffered by trying, and failing, to control our
dependencies, habits, and addictions. We’ve used every kind of
willpower, bargaining, planning, and magical thinking, each time
imagining the result would be different, and beating ourselves up when
it turned out the same.

How many times did we promise: “Just this one last time, then I’m done?
I’ll just use or drink on the weekends, or only after work, or only on
special occasions. I’ll never drink in the morning. I won’t do the hard
stuff. I’ll never get high alone. I’ll never use at work or around my
family. I’ll never drink and drive. I’ll never use needles.”

How many diets have we tried? How many times have we said we wouldn’t
binge, or purge, or restrict calories, or over-exercise?

How many times have we looked at the scars on our arms and vowed to
never cut again? How many times have we let our wounds heal, only to
break them open once more?

How many limits have we set on ourselves around technology or work, only
to get sucked back in? How many times have we vowed to have no more
one-night stands, vowed to stay away from certain people or places or
websites? How many times have we crossed our own boundaries and been
consumed by shame?

How many mornings did we wake up hating ourselves, vowing to never do
again what we did last night, only to find ourselves repeating the same
mistake again just a few hours later?

How many times did we attempt to cure our addictions with therapy, with
self-help books, with cleanses, with more exercise, by changing a job or
relationship? How many times did we move, thinking our shadow wouldn’t
follow us?

How many promises did we make? How many times did we break those
promises?

Having suffered and struggled with addiction in its many forms, we’ve
come to understand this first truth as it relates to recovery: Addiction
is suffering. We suffer when we obsess, when we cling and grasp onto all
of the delusions of addiction, all the impermanent solutions to our
discomfort and pain. We’ve tried to cure our suffering by using the very
substances and behaviors that create more discomfort and pain. In all of
our attempts to control our habits, we’ve still been clinging to the
illusion that we can somehow control our experiences of the world. We’re
still caught in the prison of suffering.

In fact, we’re reinforcing the walls of that prison, building them
taller and stronger as we act on our addictions.

Liberation comes when we gain a clear understanding of where our real
power lies, and where we are throwing it away.

This is a program of empowerment. It’s a path of letting go of behavior
that no longer serves us and cultivating that which does.

***Trauma and Attachment Injury ***

For many of us, suffering also exists as trauma. Trauma is often
described as the psychological damage that occurs after living through
an extremely frightening or distressing event or situation. It’s caused
by an overwhelming amount of stress that exceeds our ability to cope,
and may make it hard to function even long after the event. Trauma can
come from childhood experiences or from events that occur in our
adulthood. It can be sudden, or it can develop over time from a series
of events that changed how we perceived the world. While trauma
frequently comes from life-threatening events, any situation that leaves
one feeling emotionally or physically in danger can be traumatic.

It’s important to note that it’s not the objective facts of the event
alone that determine how traumatic it is, it’s the subjective emotional
perception of the person who experiences it. Generally, the more terror
and helplessness we feel, and the longer that terror lasts, the more
likely it is that we’ll be traumatized.

*Attachment injury* can be just as insidious and harmful as trauma, and
can have the same impact. It’s defined as an emotional wound to a core
relationship with a caregiver, often caused by abuse, neglect, or
inconsistency of care in early childhood. Attachment injury and trauma
can impact our recovery and meditation practice in slightly different
ways. With trauma we may feel fear (even panic) or distrust when asked
to “sit” in meditation, even when intellectually we know we’re in a safe
place with a supportive group. It may be triggering to be asked to be
present in our bodies and minds, or to focus on our breath. Attachment
injury may show up as a hesitation to trust people or a process, as a
reluctance to be part of a recovery group or sangha, or as a core belief
that we don’t belong. In this case, the nurturing thing to do for
ourselves might be to lean into this discomfort and compassionately
engage and investigate the stories we’re telling ourselves about not
belonging. Again, it’s key to become aware of the nature of the harm we
carry with us. Trauma and attachment injury may require different ways
of feeling safe and supported. You should always do whatever is most
compassionate for yourself in the moment, and seek outside help when you
need it.

Trauma and attachment issues are relevant to suffering and addiction
because the impact can be intense. Studies show that a majority of
people who struggle with addiction have experienced trauma at some point
in their lives. The same system that serves to keep us safe from harm is
also the one that fuels the mechanisms of aversion and craving that
perpetuate suffering. This system can be overactive when trauma is
present because it perceives a very real threat, and the body often
responds with feelings of helplessness, fear, and vulnerability. This
system can be easily thrown into overdrive when one’s life experience
screams: "You're not safe! Danger! Danger!"

For some people, symptoms of trauma may be increasingly severe and last
long after the events that originally caused the trauma have ended. Many
of us have intrusive thoughts that seem to come out of the blue, or we
feel confusion or mood swings we can’t tie to specific events. Traumatic
responses may lead us to avoid activities or places that trigger
memories of the event. We can become socially isolated and withdrawn,
and lose interest in things we used to enjoy. Trauma may mean we’re
easily startled, edgy, or dysfunctional during sex or other activities,
or unusually alert to potential danger. Overwhelming fear, anxiety,
detachment and isolation, shame, and anger may become background states
of our activities. There are many other effects of trauma that may be
triggered by social interactions or even during work or meditation—areas
that may seem disconnected from the original events.

Trauma and attachment issues can certainly lead to the fear, anger,
anxiety, and loneliness that are common responses to the experience of
life. But, at a deeper level, trauma makes it harder for us to cope in
general, to form healthy or safe relationships, to develop an identity
in the world, or to defend ourselves. No two of us will react to the
same experience in the same way, but this truth points to the fact that
certain kinds of experience in our pasts can affect our responses later
in life. This is key to understanding dukkha, and to meeting our
experience with compassion and kindness rather than judgment (not only
for others but also for ourselves), which is an essential part of
recovery.

Many of us turned to addictive substances and behaviors as a way to cope
with our trauma. In some ways, running from the pain of our experiences
through our addictions was itself a survival technique when it felt like
we wouldn’t be able to live through the pain of our memories. While this
may have provided some temporary relief, it did nothing to actually heal
the pain of our trauma, and often led to even more pain.

Our trauma is not our fault, but healing from it is our responsibility,
and our right. Developing understanding and compassion toward the way
trauma affects our reactions to events or circumstances *now* is an
important part of that healing.

***Questions for Inquiry of the First Noble Truth: ***

Begin by making a list of the behaviors and actions associated with your
addiction(s) that you consider harmful. Without exaggerating or
minimizing, think about the things you have done that have caused harm
to yourself and others.

For each behavior listed, write how you have suffered because of that
behavior, and write how others have suffered because of that behavior.
List any other costs or negative consequences you can think of, such as
finances, health, relationships, sexual relations, or missed
opportunities.

Do you notice any patterns? What are they? What are the ways that you
might avoid or reduce suffering for yourself and others if you change
these patterns?

How have your addictive behaviors been a response to trauma and pain?
What are some ways you can respond to trauma and pain that nurture
healing rather than avoiding?