PREFACE 
========

Once we make a decision to recover from addiction—to substances, habits,
people, whatever—it can be scary. The feeling is often one of loss and
loneliness, because recovery can shake our sense of identity, our idea
of who we are. *Who will I be if I let my addiction go?* Change can be
hard to face, even if we know we’re letting go of something that’s a
danger to us. For many of us, the first and most significant challenge
was finding a safe and stable place to begin healing.

This is a book about using Buddhist practices and principles to recover
from addiction, but you don’t need to become a Buddhist to benefit from
this program. One of the most revolutionary things the Buddha taught was
that the mind is not only the source of great suffering— due to craving,
greed, anger, and confusion—but the cure for that suffering as well. So
what we’re doing is using an ancient, proven way to literally change our
minds. And we’re choosing to trust in our own potential for wisdom and
compassion for others *and* ourselves.

What you have in your hands is a collaboration from many members of our
community. It’s intended to be a friendly guide for those new to this
path as well as longterm practitioners. It’s structured around what are
sometimes called the “three jewels of Buddhism:” **the Buddha** (the
potential for our own awakening and the goal of the path), **the
Dharma** (how we get there), and **the Sangha** (who we travel with).
We’ll share how we have used this program to recover from addiction and
the ways we’ve made it our own: not as a one-size-fits-all approach, but
as a dynamic set of tools and techniques that anyone can use to find
relief from the suffering of addiction.

> **WHAT IS RECOVERY DHARMA? **

The word *dharma* doesn’t have a single English meaning. It’s a word in
an ancient language called Sanskrit, and it can be translated as
“truth,” “phenomena,” or “the nature of things.” When it’s capitalized,
the word *Dharma* usually means the teachings of the Buddha and the
practices based on those teachings.

The Buddha knew that all human beings, to one degree or another,
struggle with craving—the powerful, sometimes blinding desire to change
our thoughts, feelings, and circumstances. Those of us who experience
addiction have been more driven to use substances or behaviors to do
this, but the underlying craving is the same. And even though the Buddha
didn’t talk specifically about addiction, he understood the obsessive
nature of the human mind. He understood our attachment to pleasure and
aversion to pain. He understood the extreme lengths we can sometimes go
to, chasing what we want to feel and running away from the feelings we
fear. And he found a solution.

This book describes a way to free ourselves from the suffering of
addiction using Buddhist practices and principles. This program leads to
recovery from addiction to substances like alcohol and drugs, and also
from what we refer to as *process addictions*. We can also become
addicted to sex, gambling, technology, work, codependence, shopping,
food, media, self-harm, lying, stealing, obsessive worrying. This is a
path to freedom from any repetitive and habitual behavior that causes
suffering.

Many of us who have found our way here might be new to Buddhism. There
are unfamiliar words, concepts, and ways of looking at the world. It can
be intimidating and uncomfortable to sit in a meeting with people
throwing around words like karma, Dharma, Sangha, and Buddha. If you
have felt this way, you’re not alone. The purpose of this book is to lay
out our path and practice in a clear and simple way that can be of use
to people who are brand new to recovery and to Buddhism, as well as
those with some experience. It describes the original Buddhist teachings
to show where our program comes from. It introduces the essence of
Buddhism’s basic teachings— the Four Noble Truths—in a way that shows
how practicing the Eightfold Path is a pragmatic tool-kit for dealing
with the challenges of both early and long-term recovery.

This is a renunciation-based program. Regardless of the type of
addiction we identify with, all of our members commit to a basic
abstinence from the substance or behavior of our addiction. For those of
us whose addictions involve things like food and technology from which
complete abstinence may not be possible, renunciation will mean
something different, based on thoughtful boundaries and intentions in
our behaviors. For some of us, abstinence from things like obsessive
sexual behavior or compulsively seeking out love and relationships may
be necessary as we work to understand and find meaningful boundaries.
Many of us have found that after renouncing our primary addiction for a
period of time, other harmful behaviors and process addictions become
apparent in our lives. But rather than getting discouraged, we found
that we can also meet these behaviors with compassion and patient
investigation. We believe recovery is a lifelong, holistic process of
peeling back layers of habits and conditioned behaviors to find our own,
sometimes hidden, potential for awakening.

Our program is peer-led: we don’t follow any one teacher or leader. We
support each other as partners walking the path of recovery together.
This is not a program based in dogma or religion, but in finding the
truth for ourselves. This is wisdom that has worked for us, but it is
not the only path. It’s fully compatible with other spiritual paths and
programs of recovery. We know from our own experience that true recovery
is only possible with the intention of radical honesty, understanding,
awareness, and integrity, and we trust you to discover your own path. We
believe this program can help you do just that.

Ours is a program that asks us to never stop growing. It asks us to own
our choices and be responsible for our own healing. It’s based on
kindness, generosity, forgiveness, and deep compassion. We do not rely
on tools of shame and fear as motivation. We know these haven’t worked
in our own individual pasts, and have often created more struggle and
suffering through relapse and discouragement. The courage it takes to
recover from addiction is ultimately courage of the heart, and we aim to
support each other as we commit to this brave work.

Many of us have spent our lives beating ourselves up. In this program,
we renounce violence and doing harm, including the harm and violence we
do to ourselves. We believe in the healing power of forgiveness. We put
our trust in our own potential to awaken and recover, in the Four Noble
Truths of the Buddha, and in the people we meet and connect with in
meetings and throughout our journey in recovery.

The truth is that we can never truly escape the circumstances and
conditions that are part of the human condition. We’ve tried that
already—through drugs and alcohol, through sex and codependency, through
gambling and technology, through work and shopping, through food or the
restriction of food, through obsession and the futile attempts to
control our experiences and feelings—and we’re here because we realized
it didn’t work. This is a program that asks us to recognize and accept
that some pain and disappointment will always be present, to investigate
the unskillful ways we have dealt with that pain in the past, and to
develop a habit of understanding, compassion, and mercy toward our own
pain, the pain of others, and the pain we have caused others due to our
ignorance and confusion. That acceptance is what brings freedom from the
suffering that made our pain unbearable.

This book is only an introduction to a path that can bring liberation
and freedom from the cycle of suffering created by addiction. The
intention, and the hope, is that every person on the path will be
empowered to make it their own.

May you be happy.

May you be at ease.

May you be free from suffering.

Where to Begin 
---------------

So how *can* we use Buddhism for our recovery? There are three ways in
which we focus our energy: not stepby-step, but in a holistic way as our
insight and our awareness grow.

We come to understand the Four Noble Truths and use them as a guide for
our own path of recovery. This program doesn’t ask us to believe in
anything other than our own potential to wake up: just allowing
ourselves to believe that it’s possible, or even that it *might* be
possible. We begin to believe that our own efforts will make a
difference. This is the realization that there is a way to recover and
then the decision to start that process.

As we learn about the Four Noble Truths—including the Eightfold Path
that leads to the end of the suffering caused by addiction—we put these
principles into practice in our lives. This book includes an
introduction to these truths, and there are many ways to continue
studying them. The Eightfold Path is a guide to a nonharming way of
being in the world. It’s not just a philosophy, but a plan of action.

Meditation is an essential part of the program. This book has some basic
instructions so you can start right away. Most of us have found it very
helpful to attend meetings that include an opportunity to practice
meditation with others. A key to this program is establishing a regular
meditation practice, in and outside of meetings. This will help us begin
the process of investigating our own minds, our reactivity, and our
behavior. We look deeply at the nature and causes of our suffering so we
can find a path to freedom that’s based on authentic selfknowledge.

The following chapters talk about these three aspects of the program—the
“three jewels” of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha—as a way of developing the
wisdom, ethical conduct, and spiritual practice that we have found leads
to recovery. We hope that people and groups will use this book in ways
that are useful for their own processes of recovery. We offer some
suggestions in that spirit. You’re invited to take what works for you
and leave the rest.

At the end of each section are a series of questions to explore. These
Inquiries can be used as part of a formal process of self-investigation
with a mentor, wise friend, or group; as tools to explore a specific
life situation; as guides for a daily self-inquiry practice; or as
meeting discussion topics. A wise friend or mentor can be of great help
in deepening your understanding, and we encourage you to reach out to
people you encounter at meetings. Supportive friendships are an integral
part of the practice. The questions may bring up shame, guilt, or
sadness; or, for some, they may potentially activate trauma. It can be
very beneficial to get supports set up ahead of time, such as taking the
questions only one at a time, timing the work so you can have a chance
to engage in self-care afterwards, and so forth. The intent of the
questions is to deepen our practice so we can experience relief sooner,
not to bring us more suffering.

Our path is not a checklist, but is rather a practice in which we choose
where and how to invest our energy in a way that is both wise and
compassionate toward ourselves and others. We do not “complete” our
journey based on how much we meditate or how many meetings we go to or
how many written inventories we’ve completed. The practice of the
Eightfold Path helps us develop insight and self-compassion as we begin
to look into the causes and conditions that led to our own suffering
with addiction. The tools will come to bear the signs of wear and
markings of our using them.

This path doesn’t have an end. Your life, like all of ours, will
probably continue to present you with challenges. What the path *does*
offer, however, is a way out of the suffering that our habitual
reactions to challenges often bring, and an end to the illusion of
escape we tried to find in substances or behaviors. It’s a way to break
our own chains with our own hands. It’s a path of freedom.

THE PRACTICE 
=============

**Renunciation:** We understand *addiction* to describe the overwhelming
craving and compulsive use of substances or behaviors in order to escape
present-time reality, either by clinging to pleasure or running from
pain. We commit to the intention of abstinence from alcohol and other
addictive substances. For those of us recovering from process
addictions, particularly those for which complete abstinence is not
possible, we also identify and commit to wise boundaries around our
harmful behaviors, preferably with the help of a mentor or therapeutic
professional.

**Meditation:** We commit to the intention of developing a daily
meditation practice. We use meditation as a tool to investigate our
actions, intentions, and reactivity. Meditation is a personal practice,
and we commit to finding a balanced effort toward this and other healthy
practices that are appropriate to our own journey on the path.

**Meetings:** We attend recovery meetings whenever possible, in person
and/or online. Some may wish to be part of other recovery fellowships
and Buddhist communities. In early recovery, it is recommended to attend
a recovery meeting as often as possible. For many that may mean every
day. We also commit to becoming an active part of the community,
offering our own experiences and service wherever possible.

**The Path:** We commit to deepening our understanding of the Four Noble
Truths and to practicing the Eightfold Path in our daily lives.

**Inquiry and Investigation:** We explore the Four Noble Truths as they
relate to our addictive behavior through writing and sharing in-depth,
detailed Inquiries. These can be worked with the guidance of a mentor,
in partnership with a trusted friend, or with a group. As we complete
our written Inquiries, we undertake to hold ourselves accountable and
take direct responsibility for our actions, which includes making amends
for the harm we have caused in our past. .

**Sangha, Wise Friends, Mentors:** We cultivate relationships within a
recovery community, to both support our own recovery and support the
recovery of others. After we have completed significant work on our
Inquiries, established a meditation practice, and achieved renunciation
from our addictive behaviors, we can then become mentors to help others
on their path to liberation from addiction. Anyone with any period of
time of renunciation and practice can be of service to others in their
sangha. When mentors are not available, a group of wise friends can act
as partners in self-inquiry and support each other’s practice.

**Growth:** We continue our study of these Buddhist practices through
reading, listening to dharma talks, visiting and becoming members of
recovery and spiritual sanghas, and attending meditation or dharma
retreats when we believe these practices will contribute to our
understanding and wisdom. We undertake a lifelong journey of growth and
awakening.